Theories of CSCL  
  
Gerry Stahl1 and Kai Hakkarainen2 
1 Chatham, Massachusetts, USA, Gerry@GerryStahl.net  
2 University of Helsinki, Department of Educational Sciences, Helsinki, Finland, 
Kai.Hakkarainen@helsinki.fi  
  
Abstract . This chapter examines collaborative learning as cognition at the small -group unit of 
analysis, and highlights theoretical questions conce rning interrelationships among individual, 
collective and cultural cognition. CSCL is a  theory - and research -based pedagogical vision of 
what collaborative learning could be like, thanks to innovative computational supports and new 
ways of thinking about l earning. Theories of CSCL are shaped by rapidly evolving digital 
technologies, pedagogical practices and research methods. Relevant theories can be 
categorized as: subjective (individual cognition and learning), intersubjective (interactional 
meaning makin g) and inter -objective (networks of learners, tools, artifacts and practices). 
Theoretical insights suggest ways of enhancing, supporting and analyzing cognition and 
learning by individuals, groups and communities. The emerging ecology of socio -digital 
participation —involving students’ daily use of computers, mobile devices, social media and the 
Internet —requires extending and synthesizing CSCL theories to conceptualize connected 
learning at multiple levels.  
Introduction  & Scope: Theory of Theories  
Educatio nal research and practice should be informed by theory. However, CSCL has adopted 
and spawned a variety of competing theories. How should CSCL researchers and practitioners 
react to the current situation and what should they expect in the future?  
Theories of CSCL are important to define what is unique about CSCL and to counter 
misunderstandings about the nature and aims of CSCL as an evolving research field. CSCL is a  
theory - and research -based pedagogical vision of what collaborative learning could be like , 
given the development of innovative computational supports and new ways of conceptualizing 
knowledge (epistemology), thought (cognition) and (collaborative) learning —largely influenced 
by contemporary and emerging philosophical approaches and theories. H ence, CSCL is not 
simply the study of the use of existing technologies in conventional educational settings, as 
analyzed by traditional methods and theories. Rather, new theories have implications for 
designing CSCL technologies, associated pedagogic pract ices and analytic methods.  
To examine the role of theory, we need to examine the question of just what “ CSCL ” is. Some treat it as simply a form of educational technology, where students communicate over 
networked devices, possibly enhanced through some AI  application. From this perspective 
CSCL can involve learning either “through” or “around” CSCL technology (Lehtinen et al., 1999). 
The former involves CSCL environments mediating —or providing a medium for —learners’ 
synchronous or asynchronous online inter action, whereas the latter engages learners 
interacting face -to-face and co -creating knowledge or artifacts around digital devices , such as 
models, drawings, art works or craft objects developed on computers or tablets . Technological 
development is, howeve r, blurring boundaries of such activities, as all knowledge work 
increasingly involves socio -digital technologies.  
Others define CSCL in distinction to “cooperative” learning, where tasks are divided among 
students in a group working on a task, whereas col laborative learning involves joint pursuit of 
knowledge objects (Knorr -Cetina, 2001), which learners seek to understand by co -authoring 
texts or other products incorporating evolving shared meaning and common understanding. 
CSCL is also contrasted with  Com puter -Supported Cooperative Work  (CSCW ), where adults 
work together on professional tasks using computer support.  
Still others focus on the intersubjective aspects of collaboration , which involve real -time 
interaction in small groups and associated efforts of meaning making. Post -humanist 
approaches highlight the active role of digital and other artifacts and physical, virtual or mixed 
environments in which enacted collaborative activity is embedded. Such an “inter -objective” 
(Latour, 1996 ) framework guides one to examine how multiple people learn as a group, 
community or network by building joint meaning and constructing shared artifacts within 
technologically rich  environments . 
This chapter will review the changing role of theory in CSCL,  the major theories that are 
currently influential in the field, as well as their philosophical and methodological underpinnings. 
This chapter’s discussion of theories of CSCL is anchored to an examin ation of interrelations 
and mutual shaping among  the technologies, practices and research methods of CSCL (Figure 
1), characterized as follows.  
  
*** INSERT FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE ***   
Figure 1. Framework for examining theories of CSCL.  
  
●      Technolog y: The emergence of the CSCL field was associated wit h the 
development of information and communication technologies or groupware systems that 
enabled synchronous and asynchronous interaction and collaboration among learners. 
These developments  inspired environments and theories for collaborative learning. T he 
future of CSCL will continue to be mediated by rapid development of socio -digital 
technologies. However, t he use of generic social media apps is in tension with CSCL’s 
traditional focus on specialized applications for collaboration. Commercially develop ed 
social media  (like FaceBook or Twitter)  are predominantly designed for exchange of 
personal opinions ( resulting in flaming and fake news) rather than for supporting 
intersubjective processes of knowledge building in domains like argumentation, sciences 
and mathematics.  
●      Practice : Educational use of CSCL technologies is a systemic endeavor anchored 
in social practices of students, teachers and educational institutions. The impacts of 
CSCL technologies are mediated both by prevailing educational prac tices and enacted 
practices of using these technologies in learning and instruction. CSCL investigators 
have developed pedagogic frameworks and guidelines for supporting innovative CSCL 
implementations, together with developing theories for understanding p ractices of CSCL 
and its transformative dynamics. The socio -political agenda of CSCL to improve the 
quality of learning, democratize knowledge and promote educational equity requires 
CSCL researchers to work closely with educators in iterative design exper iments to 
implement CSCL in context.  
●      Method:  With their research methods, investigators analyze CSCL processes and 
practices, contributing to redesign of CSCL technologies and pedagogic models, as well 
as refining theories of CSCL. Analyses of CSCL in practice have motivated theories of 
cognition that is socially and materially distributed, temporally and socially emergent, 
and embodied, enactive, embedded and extended. The field has developed specific 
methods and investigative practices for studying  collaborative learning at multiple levels: 
from the individual and small group to classroom/community/cultural/societal units of 
analysis.  
What kind of theory is appropriate and useful for deepening understanding, explanation and 
advancement of CSCL?  
The theory of science has morphed considerably in recent decades (see e.g., Latour & Woolgar, 
1979) , away  from former positivist conceptions of theory and of science. Today, the goal of a 
theory of CSCL is a controversial moving target, not an established canon of universally 
accepted principles. We will be less concerned with predictive theory typical for the natural 
sciences, and more with theory as a tool for understanding and transforming learning and 
education. A number of theories have been prominent in CSCL during the past 25 years due to 
the trans -disciplinary nature of the field; researchers trained in specific fields —such as 
education, design, psychology, computer science, anthropology or linguistics —brought with 
them theories, methodologies and ph ilosophies of science from these quite diverse enterprises.  
This has resulted in a confusing variety of incommensurate, competing theories influential within 
CSCL research. For instance, the most common theories identified in recent content meta -
analyses o f CSCL (Akkerman et al., 2007; Jeong & Hmelo -Silver, 2016; Jeong, Hmelo -Silver & 
Yu, 2014; Kienle & Wessner, 2006; Lonchamp, 2012; Wise & Schwarz, 2017; Tang, Tsai & Lin, 
2014) were constructivist, socio -cultural, social -psychological and information -proce ssing 
frameworks. It is not clear what specific theories correspond to these vague classifications, 
which are often grouped based on loose author self -identification rather than  by looking at the 
approaches actually applied in the reported research. Diffic ulties in comprehensively 
characterizing CSCL theories reflect the complexity of the evolving field, where different 
research questions require distinct kinds of investigation.  
To clarify the range of traditional and emerging theories, we have categorized them under these 
headings: subjective  (foregrounding individual cognition and learning), intersubjective  (centered 
on interactional meaning making) and inter-objective  (emphasis on building of heterogeneous 
networks of learners, tools, artifacts and practi ces). These overlapping  categories of  theories 
have been crucial for understanding the field of CSCL, its developmental history and its 
envisioned future.  In the following sections, we will suggest elements of a more integrated theory of CSCL. W e first 
review the history of CSCL technologies, practices and methods, as tied to the subjective, 
intersubjective and inter -objective theories that seem critical for advancement of the field.  
History & Development  
Interdependence of Theory and Method  
Histor ical s hifts in theory both influenced and responded to changes in research practices, 
analysis methods and focal concerns of CSCL research. The t heories influence how 
researchers define their object of study, how they investigate it and how they interpret their 
findings.  
Much theory in CSCL c ame from the subjective theories of empirical approaches in 
psychology —cognitive, educational and social  psychology —and contribute d assumptions and 
research methods for CSCL. Although the pioneering contributions of ps ychologists like Brown 
(1992) highlighted the importance of pursuing field case -studies in actual classrooms, the 
psychological sciences generally prioritize d controlled laboratory experiments and statistical 
measures of collected data.  
Because implementat ion of CSCL in education calls for systemic change in social practices that 
individualistic psychological theories are unable to account for, subjective approaches have 
been critiqued, complemented, expanded and partially replaced by approaches that emphas ize 
materially and socially distributed aspects of thinking and learning, rather than mental models or 
symbolic representations. Such development has been critical for the development of CSCL, 
given its technological and social mediation of learning. One w ay to understand the history of 
psychological theories is as a sequence from positivism and behaviorism to cognitivism, and 
then to socio -cultural theory —or from individual cognition to situated, distributed, group and 
social cognition. Controlled experime nts to measure individual learning gains have been either 
complemented or replaced with in -depth case studies or longitudinal ethnographies, without 
which emerging CSCL practices could not have been fully understood, adequately explained or 
deliberately fo stered.  
The recognition of the complexity of learning in CSCL settings necessitate s extending the theory 
and bringing in conceptualizations and methods from related fields. Hence, CSCL theories 
increasingly invoke and adapt methods from other social scienc es, including linguistics and 
anthropology. The resulting contextualized approaches to analyzing cognition address thinking 
and learning as involving people situated in dialog with others, within a world of language, 
artifacts and culture. Such CSCL studie s often use interaction analysis or design -based 
research to understand and explore how groups of students interact using technological artifacts 
and systems. Especially in CSCL, the primary actor, cognitive agent or collaborative learner 
may be seen as th e small group itself (Stahl, 2006). Collaborative learning can be studied at 
various interdependent units of analysis —such as linguistic moves and embodied actions (e.g., 
gesturing, sketching and prototyping) —and at different levels of social organization —such as an 
individual person, team, classroom, community or culture.  Surveys of methodological practices of CSCL often reflect on how theoretical frameworks affect 
the analysis methods of investigators. However, available technologies and methods can 
provide access to specific kinds of empirical phenomena and data, in turn inspiring the 
refinement of CSCL theory. In human sciences, methods and tools can create the very 
phenomena (research objects) of investigation, so that theories, methods or technolo gies are 
interdependent (Gigerenzer, 1994). In the development of the field of CSCL, interventions with 
discussion forums gave rise to theories of computer -mediated communication; the use of video 
games resulted in micro -analytic studies of small -group cog nition; and studies of collaborative 
environments, such as Knowledge Forum  (Scardamalia, this volume) , shaped knowledge -
building theories. The recent emergence of digital fabrication technology and educational maker 
spaces expand the scope of CSCL epistemo logically, theoretically and methodologically, to 
centrally involve the role of materially embodied artifacts in collaboration.  
CSCL studies rely on complementary bodies of thick, thin and rich big data (Hillman & Säljö, 
2016). They collect thick data  though ethnographic and participant observations, interviews and 
document ation of design experiments. Such data is needed for understanding, examining and 
further refining learners’ and teachers’ socio -digital knowledge practices. CSCL studies may 
also utilize  thin data , i.e., self -report response data that enable tracing learning, motivation and 
socio -digital activity. Self-report data may be needed for showing the perceived  impact of 
interventions. Moreover, CSCL i nvestigators have developed novel instruments  and methods for 
tracing and analyzing the “big” data of contextual , digitally mediated learning activities and 
processes . Such big data can be interpreted along with thick process data and thin self -report 
data. CSCL research addresses complex and often m essy efforts of implementing collaborative 
practices in education and, therefore, often uses mixed methods for reaching robust 
understanding of CSCL processes. Although design -based and interventionist approaches 
appear to dominate CSCL, it is also importa nt to continue pursuing controlled experiments for 
testing the impact of well understood practices of using technology, possibly within the cycles of 
design -based research.  
There is growing recognition that human cognition takes place on multiple, interdep endent 
levels, and that research methods should include approaches at the individual, small group, 
community and network units of analysis. One could use different methods at each unit of 
analysis and then identify links between them. A central open questi on involves how the levels 
interact. This must become a vital concern of further development of theories of CSCL.  
Diversity of Theories & Traditional Oppositions  
An important distinction between different theoretical frameworks depends on the focal unit of  
collaboration.  
Subjective theories focus on the individual mind —admitting that student learning is influenced 
by the social context but measuring the effects of participation in the group on the individual 
members as psychological subjects.  
Inter-object ive theories are more oriented to social, community and cultural levels of analysis —
emphasizing linguistic interactions or embeddedness of learning on networks of people and artifacts. They are concerned with analyzing and cultivating the social practices in which 
learning is embedded and the social institutions that structure learning activities. The 
collaborative group then stands in the middle, between the individuals who participate in the 
group, tools and artifacts used, and the community or larger net work whose practices the group 
adopts and adapts as it learns collaboratively.  
Intersubjective  theories  focus on the group itself as the unit of analysis. Collaborative learning, 
which takes place in CSCL primarily at th e group  unit, can have consequences  at the other 
levels, leading to learning outcomes for the individuals or transformation of community social 
practices (Lave & Wenger, 1991).  
The array of theories has evolved through a series of historical developments. The history of 
Western philosophy f rom the early Greeks to the present provides many of our now 
commonsensical assumptions about scientific method (Stahl, 2020, Investigation 15). 
Empiricism, for instance, culminated in positivism and its view of objective knowledge. 
Rationalism assumed tha t all cognition took place in individual minds, which used propositions 
in the head to represent facts in the world and to deduce knowledge. In psychology, 
behaviorism limited science to empirical study of a subject’s externally observable behavior. 
That w as challenged by cognitivism, which argued that learning and knowledge required 
mediation by the mind, for instance using language and logical reasoning (Chomsky, 1959). 
Cognitive science’s computational theory of mind assumed encapsulated mind with intern al 
representations, memory storage and information processing analogous with those of early 
computers (Gardner, 1985).  
Constructivism and social constructivism followed (Packer & Goicoechea, 2000). They accepted 
Kant’s (1787) philosophical insight that the  human mind structures all knowledge of the world. 
Educationally, this implies that students should be guided to make sense of new information in 
terms of their own understandings (past knowledge, personal perspective, existing 
conceptualizations, motivati ons). While this had radical consequences for educational theory, it 
still focused on the individual as learner. The resulting “constructivist” theories tended to be 
uninformative (everything is in some vague sense constructed).  
Alternative socio -historica lly motivated theories then developed based on the dynamic 
philosophy of Hegel (1807) and Marx (1867), which shaped Vygotsky’s, Bakhtin’s and other 
investigators’ theories of the social mind and mediated cognition. From the perspective of the 
emerging soci o-cultural framework, cognitive development and learning were results of 
dialectics between personal tool -mediated activities, group interactions, social practices and 
“cognitive -cultural macro -structures” (Donald, 1991). This can be viewed as a watershed 
transformation from individualism to recognition of the group and social community as pivotal to 
learning, opening the way for CSCL as an educational approach.  
“Mediation” is a concept developed in Hegel’s dialectical philosophy and central for CSCL. 
Notic e that the word has connotations of media and middle. It can refer to a variety of processes 
that take place in the middle of two related phenomena. For cognitivism, the human mind plays 
a mediating role in transforming perceptions of the world into mental  knowledge. In CSCL, 
technologies provide the tools and media through which interactions between people, groups 
and artifacts take place; they mediate both interaction and materially embodied activity. In CSCL contexts, interaction is not directly between minds, but is mediated by language, gesture, 
symbol, technology and context (including school practices, background knowledge, previous 
interactions).  
Vygotsky’s theory of “mediated cognition” provides an historical cornerstone of CSCL theory.  
Development and Learning in Vygotsky  
Vygotsky (1930) developed an approach to educational psychology appropriate to the 
philosophical methods of Hegel and Marx. His writings point beyond individual psychology to a 
recognition of mediated, group, social cognition. Thereby, they offer an important starting point 
for CSCL theory.  
Collaborative learning, as the source of cognitive development, may be considered a basis of all 
human learning, not just an optional and rare mode of instruction. That is, group c ognition is a 
foundation of human cognition (planning, problem solving, deduction, storytelling, etc.) at all 
levels. Vygotsky’s experiments illustrate ways in which group cognition forms a base for 
individual cognition. By incorporating language, external  symbols and other cultural artifacts, 
this process connects the cultural and community level to the small -group and individual levels.  
The gap between cultural development and individual learning is what Vygotsky calls the “zone 
of proximal development” ( ZpD). This includes what a child will next be able to learn. It is a 
prime arena for CSCL intervention, because students in this zone can learn collaboratively what 
they cannot yet learn by themselves. In Vygotsky’s (1930, pp. 86f) well known discussion of  the 
ZpD, he cites a study in which children “could do only under guidance, in collaboration and in 
groups at the age of three -to-five years what they could do independently when they reached 
the age of five -to-seven years.” CSCL can be seen precisely as s uch an effort to stimulate 
students within their ZpD —on tasks they cannot yet master individually but are close to being 
ready to learn —under guidance, in collaboration and in groups.  
In his “Problems of Method,” Vygotsky (1930, pp. 58 -75) called for a new  paradigm of 
educational research almost a century ago. Arguing that one cannot simply look at post -test 
results of an experiment, he proposed a method of “double stimulation” where a child is 
confronted by a learning challenge and a potential artifact to mediate that work. Instead of 
proposing an experimental study for comparing learning outcomes with and without some 
furnished artifact, Vygotsky suggests that “the experimenter waits until they spontaneously 
apply some new auxiliary method or symbol that t hey then incorporate into their operations.” 
Taking this inter -objective research approach on collaboration requires attention to the 
children’s interaction, the object -related activity and the sense -making that is involved in 
creative, unanticipated colla borative accomplishments.  
The essence of Vygotsky’s method of double stimulation is the CSCL practice of engaging 
learners themselves in extended processes of co -creating artifacts for transforming problem 
situations and re -mediating their learning process es (Ritella & Hakkarainen, 2012); see also 
(Paavola & Hakkarainen, this volume). Such investigation involves tracing the unique 
trajectories of distinct groups’  object -related activities , which could not be understood if sorted 
into statistically aggregate d or standardized categories.  Furthermore, the key role of mediation of group cognition by artifacts —as stimulants to working 
on a primary learning object —points to the importance of computer support in CSCL. CSCL 
environments can be designed with a wide v ariety of artifacts (scripts, models, manipulatives, 
graphics, prompts, etc.) to stimulate collaborative learning. Vygotsky’s brief career began in the 
context of stimulus/response behaviorism. Through critiquing with a dynamic lens the theories of 
learnin g that were popular in his time, Vygotsky sketched a vision of the ties between individual, 
group and community (social, cultural) cognition that CSCL researchers can now elaborate . 
State of the Art  
Recent Theories Influential in  CSCL  
CSCL is distinguished by its pedagogic, analytic and technological focus on collaboration. 
Popular socio -cultural  theories in CSCL build on Vygotsky’s initiative. Most traditional and socio -
cognitive  theories of learning, by contrast, focus on the individu al mind as the learner and the 
repository of learned knowledge. The theories presented in this section consider how learning 
(cognition) and knowledge (epistemology) can be considered at larger units of analysis than the 
individual human, such as the small  group and various social or cultural levels, including 
artifacts and other contextual referents.  
Socio -cognitive Research on CSCL  
Socio -cognitive theories of CSCL, which build on conceptions of individual learning, cognition 
and motivation, typically aim at examining (a) how collaborative group learning affects 
advancement of individual learning and (b) how manipulations of controlled  independent 
variables affect the success of students’ collaborative learning. Investigators may focus on 
cognitive and moti vational gains of personal and collaborative learning or measure the impact of 
various scripting strategies on collaborative -learning processes and individual -learning 
outcomes (e.g., Weinberger et al., 2005). Studies of regulation in CSCL have expanded fr om 
self-regulation to peer assisted co -regulation and group regulation (e.g., Panadero & Järvelä, 
2015). Although socio -cognitive studies often rely on laboratory experiments and quasi -
experimental designs, many use mixed methods and collect data from fiel d studies. Each 
approach has appropriate rigorous standards of evidence that it can follow (Methods section, 
this volume).  
Ethnomethodology  
Ethnomethodology contrasts with socio -cognitive approaches in that it does not seek to analyze 
psychological process es in the minds of individuals, but studies social, interactional and 
linguistic practices that can be observed directly, for instance in detailed transcripts of 
conversation. Garfinkel (1967) argued that human behavior is based on the adoption of social 
practices or “member methods” shared through participation in a given culture. It is because 
everyone is familiar with these practices that people can make sense of each other’s behavior. 
Furthermore, people display in their embodied activity how their acti ons should be understood. Sacks studied this in transcripts of ordinary conversation, founding Conversation Analysis 
(Garfinkel & Sacks, 1970; Sacks, 1965). Investigations showed how people design their speech 
to open and close new topics, to respond to ea ch other and to repair misunderstandings 
(Schegloff, 2007). As a sociological approach, ethnomethodology shifts the view of learning to 
the community, social or cultural level.  
Dialogism  
Bakhtin’s (1981) theory has affected CSCL research by guiding investigators in analyzing 
dialogic interaction processes. The dialogic approach guides students in sustained interaction 
that enables them to explore and build on their own and peers’ ideas (Wegerif, 2007) . From the 
dialogic nature of thinking and meaning, it follows that a person’s utterance in conversation, 
writing or thinking should not necessarily be interpreted as an expression of private mental 
representations or beliefs, but as an interac tive response to on -going communication, designed 
to evoke future responses. Furthermore, speech incorporates countless standard elocutions that 
are part of shared literary genre s and language. Often, specific words that someone else used 
are repeated and taken up in subsequent  utterance s. Accordingly, utterances should be 
analyzed and understood as dialogical moves within a social setting, not just as personal 
expressions.  
Knowledge  Building  
Pioneering CSCL work of Scardamalia and Bereiter (1996)  created a  knowledge -building 
framework that engages young students in the collaborative pursuit of knowledge advancement. 
Their groupware system for mediating knowledge -building processes evolved into Knowledge 
Forum  (see Scardamalia, this volume) . They consider kn owledge building to be a collaborative 
effort of advancing communal knowledge, as distinguished from individual learning. They 
propose that schools can be developed into “knowledge -building” communities that engage 
students in expert -like creative work wit h knowledge, appropriating disciplinary methods of 
advancing knowledge. Toward that end, students are engaged in “design mode”  activities of 
creating, improving, sharing and advancing ideas, understood as improvable conceptual 
artifacts (i.e., results of k nowledge building, such as texts, reports, designs, theories, symbols, 
tools, usable objects). Knowledge building is an emergent, nonlinear process that cannot be 
rigidly scripted or pre -determined. The knowledge -building framework has been developed in 
close collaboration with teachers committed to implementing Scardamalia’s (2002) knowledge -
building principles in practice (e.g., anchoring learning on real issues and authentic problems, 
promoting idea diversity and engaging in efforts of reflecting upon ea rlier investigations or 
proposals).  
Knowledge -Creating Learning  
Paavola and Hakkarainen (2014)  expanded the conceptually oriented knowledge -building 
theory by also taking into consideration materially embodied aspects of artifacts (see Paavola & 
Hakkaraine n, this volume). Their knowledge -creating learning approach is distinguished both 
from the knowledge -acquisition metaphor and the participation metaphor (Sfard, 1998). While 
the acquisition view represents a “mono -logical” (subjective, mental) view on huma n learning and the participation view represents a “dia -logical” (intersubjective) view, the knowledge -
creation perspective may be understood as “tri -logical” in nature because of its foregrounding 
interaction between individuals, communities and shared ep istemic objects being developed . 
Knowledge creation is anchored by deliberately cultivated knowledge practices, i.e., social 
practices of working with knowledge artifacts and media (Hakkarainen, 2009).  
Cultural -Historical  Activity Theory  
Relying on Cultura l Historical Activity Theory (CHAT) developed by Vygotsky’s colleagues, 
Engeström (1987) investigated CSCL from the perspective of expansive learning. CHAT guides 
researchers to examine CSCL as an integral part of the contradiction -laden historical 
develop ment of educational activity, calling for profound transformation of social practices 
prevailing at school s. Social practices are anchored in dynamic activity systems, which must be 
transformed to allow significant changes to happen. Expansive learning sta rts by criticizing, 
questioning and analyzing contradictions arising within the system or in its external relations. 
CHAT studies often promote community development by engaging students and teachers in 
solving vital real -world problems in collaboration wi th networks of local stakeholders, such as 
community organizations and workplaces (Engeström, Engeström & Suntio, 2002; Roth  & Lee , 
2007) . 
Actor -Network  Theory  
Actor -Network Theory (ANT) (Latour, 2007) builds on science -and-technology studies showing 
how c omplex human activity relies on networks of people, artifacts and practices. Such 
networks diverge from CHAT activity systems in terms of having diverse kinds of actors exerting 
causal influences : including non -human agents such as tools, technology -rich e nvironments or 
knowledge objects. This framework is characterized by “inter -objectivity” (Latour, 1996) in terms 
of treating humans and artifacts symmetrically and highlighting the active roles of the various 
actors. ANT has been applied more often in CSCW  and workplace situations than in educational 
or CSCL contexts but appears to have potential here as well (Fenwick & Edwards, 2011). 
Learning takes place in increasingly complex socio -material environments, which intertwine 
enacted local practices with vir tual and distributed activities. Technological artifacts have a 
dynamic dual role as agents that oscillate between structuring and constraining as well as 
directing and expanding activity. ANT examines social engineering involved in negotiating 
conflicting  interests of stakeholders —such as researchers, technology developers, educational 
administrators, teachers and students —that successful CSCL projects must align.  
Group Cognition  and Adopting Group Practices  
The theory of group cognition (Stahl, 2006; 2020, Investigation 16) is primarily concerned with 
building knowledge and epistemic artifacts through artifact -mediated processes of group 
interaction. It focuses on the small -group unit of analysis, as the leve l at which social and 
cultural phenomena and artifacts influence the interaction, which, in turn, may produce group, 
individual and community learning. The theory elaborates concepts of cognition, knowledge, 
interaction, sequentiality, intersubjectivity, s hared understanding, artifact mediation, practice, 
agency and joint attention appropriate to the small -group level of description. The interpenetration of the social, group and individual cognitive levels can be observed, analyzed 
and studied in processes involving the adoption of group practices, for instance, in the context 
of learning geometry (Stahl, 2013; 2016); see (Medina & Stahl, this volume). One can refine 
CSCL curriculum and pedagogy  to promote the adoption of key group practices. CSCL 
technology  can support the presentation, exploration and adoption of identified group practices. 
Analysis  of group interaction in CSCL settings can reveal successes and barriers to adoption of 
such practices and point to needed improvements as well as documenting su ccessful learning 
at group and individual levels.  
Dealing with Diversity  
It is appropriate that a field like CSCL, which is still an exploratory vision, allows a diversity of 
theories, from subjective to intersubjective and inter -objective. This inspires i nnovative research 
agendas. However, because theory has consequences for methodology, a researcher should 
be explicit about what theoretical framework guides a specific research project or analysis. 
One’s research question should determine the unit of anal ysis and associated methods. While 
all established theories capture some truth,  when combining approaches,  their corresponding 
methodologies may be both limiting and mutually incompatible. For instance, validated self -
report questionnaires are useful tools , but participants’ individual responses are not likely to 
adequately reveal contextual factors and intersubjective learning processes. The current 
situation of the theory of CSCL affords flexibility to the researcher but requires careful respect 
for the d iverse approaches.  
The Future  
Toward an Integrated Theory of CSCL  
CSCL theory during recent decades has increasingly broadened the phenomena of interest —
from learning impacts on individual students to forms of interaction within small groups and 
communitie s, involving various forms of artifacts and interactions among levels. Central 
theoretical concepts have been reconceptualized. Investigation of the phenomena related to 
these concepts will continue to stimulate theory building and may allow a  more  integra ted 
framework to emerge for understanding collaborative learning and for guiding technological and 
pedagogical support.  
In this section, we review themes and concepts that seem central to continuing to develop 
CSCL theory —from a collection of concerns from  related fields to a framework specific to what 
is unique to CSCL (see Figure 2). Finally, we turn from theory to practice and consider the 
implications of this chapter’s discussion for pursuing CSCL in the classroom.  
  
*** INSERT FIGURE 2 ABOUT HERE ***  
Figure 2. Framework for integrated CSCL theory.  
Elements of an Integrated Theory of CSCL  
Discourse and Interaction  
Collaborative learning proceeds through knowledge -creating discussion within a group of 
learners. The group learns by building and shar ing knowledge and by interacting in non -verbal 
ways within the CSCL environment (e.g., highlighting, sketching, modeling, prototyping, 
gesturing, producing knowledge artifacts). Analysis of collaborative interaction usually involves 
investigating transcrip ts of the discourse and multimodal interaction. It may consist of 
understanding the flow of conversational moves and embodied actions and the meaning making 
that took place by the group, perhaps adapting Conversation Analysis (Schegloff, 2007) or 
Interacti on Analysis (Jordan & Henderson, 1995) . 
Interactional Mediation by CSCL Environments  
CSCL provides multi -faceted socio -technical environments that mediate collaborative interaction 
and learning in diverse  ways. The rapidly evolving ecology of socio -digital  technologies is 
distributed across formal and informal spaces of learning, so that technology mediation is 
increasingly mashed up to take place through and “around” socio -digital tools. Theory should 
account for such mediation and inform the design of med ia to support specific, identified 
aspects of collaborative learning, as well as interconnecting informal and formal technology -
mediated learning.  
Epistemic Mediation  by Knowledge Artifacts  
CSCL environments offer learning communities shared spaces and sca ffolding for creating, 
building, visualizing, sharing, organizing and advancing knowledge artifacts. Socio -digital 
technologies enable cognitive augmentation that CSCL builds on: By technologically extending 
the mind, digital devices foster new forms of co llaborative working and engagement in 
successive refinement of complex ideas (Donald, 1991). The “epistemic mediation” involved in 
such extended thinking processes refers to a deliberate process of deepening inquiry by 
creating external epistemic artifacts  (e.g., shared written notes, visual representations, material 
artifacts, simulations and discourse media) that crystallize and promote evolving understanding 
and collective inquiry. Problems and solutions in CSCL processes can be understood as 
epistemic o bjects; such objects represent what the participants are seeking to understand and 
create but do not yet know or understand. These objects are defined by their openness, 
incompleteness and capacity to unfold indefinitely through successive thought - and aff ect-laden 
instantiations as textual or other artifacts (Knorr -Cetina, 2001) . 
Temporality and Sequentiality  
CSCL takes place over time and through language use embedded in technology -mediated 
activity. Interaction takes place through the sequential ordering  of actions, utterances and 
gestures. A given oral or written utterance typically responds to previous activity and discourse, 
generally designed to provoke a response and to propel the discourse and inquiry  forward . The 
analysis of collaborative learning as a group meaning -making process may need to interpret the 
temporality and sequentiality of captured discourse and related activity (Medina & Stahl, this 
volume). Although utterances may be analyzed statistically t o answer specific research 
questions, the enacted collaboration itself is an inherently sequential process, which cannot be 
fragmented without losing its meaning. Further, temporality and sequentiality also structure the 
non-linguistic activity. CSCL activity is embedded in unfolding social (group work) and material 
(technological) processes, which are entangled in temporal emergent assemblages, analysis of 
which may reveal development of key epistemic, group and social practices.  For instance, 
analysis at multiple time  scales can reveal processes at the micro level (e.g., utterances), meso 
level (establishment of group practices) and macro level (evolution of community cultural 
norms).  Intersubjectivity  and Shared Understanding  
A fundamental theoretical que stion for CSCL is that of intersubjectivity (Stahl, 2020, 
Investigation 18) : How is it possible (both in the abstract and in practical terms) for participants 
in a group to understand each other? This is a problem for cognitivism: If one person’s mind 
expresses a thought in a spoken utterance, how can another person’s mind know what that 
utterance meant to the speaker? Socio -cultural theory answers this by noting that people share 
language, activity context and cultures laden with mutually understood meanin gs. Of course, in 
a situation of collaborative learning there are ample opportunities for misunderstanding each 
other. Fortunately, our languages and embodied activity include shared practices for repairing 
misunderstandings. Intersubjectivity is the resul t of specific aspects of human interaction, 
beginning in prehistory (Tomasello, 2014) and continuing in successful CSCL sessions today 
(Schneider & Pea, 2013). The need to constantly maintain intersubjective shared understanding 
is a major reason that CSCL  requires special supports, training and effort in order to be 
successful.  
Personal, Distributed  and Group Agency and Units of Analysis  
Theories based on individual minds locate the agency that causes events like expressing 
opinions or learning at the indi vidual unit of analysis, looking to personal motivations and beliefs. 
Theories of distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1996)  or group cognition locate collaborative agency 
at the group unit. Activity Theory ( Engeström , 1987 ) looks as well at tensions or contra dictions 
among social factors in the setting and Actor Network Theory (Latour , 2007 ) goes even further 
to bestow agency on an open -ended universe of (past and present) human and artifact actors, 
bringing in a cultural -historical unit of analysis. CSCL theo ry should account for agency and 
other phenomena at multiple units of analysis.  
Orchestrating and Scaffolding the CSCL Culture  
An early finding of CSCL research was that collaborative learning cannot succeed in classrooms 
without preparing teachers and stu dents with an understanding of the theory and pedagogy of 
CSCL. A classroom culture of collaboration must replace the culture of individual rote learning 
and competition. CSCL aims at cultivating “nonlinear ” pedagogy, characterized by open -ended, 
emergent and inventive educational practices (Ng, 1995). Although nonlinear knowledge -
creation processes cannot be rigidly scripted (Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2014), it is necessary to 
guide and scaffold student learning for productive collaborative learning, interac tion and 
knowledge creation. Flexible teacher orchestration and CSCL structuring is required to cultivate 
local practices of working with knowledge and media (Zhang,  et al.,  2018). A delicate balance is 
needed for guiding, scaffolding, orchestrating, struc turing and facilitating collaborative 
knowledge creation.   
CSCL theory must  recognize these implementational requirements and point the way to the 
desired  vision. The theories just enumerated offer insight s into what learning and knowledge 
building might  be like in effective CSCL contexts. They supply  concepts and frameworks for 
thinking about such collaborative processes. They also provide guidance for CSCL research 
into the design and trial of technology and pedagogy for supporting CSCL.  Theoretical Perspectives on Implementing CSCL  
Implementing the Vision of CSCL in Classrooms  
CSCL has been criticized for having failed to transform education (e.g., Wise & Schwarz, 2017). 
Critics assume that once students had computers and became accustome d to networking with 
other students, the incorporation of collaborative learning and CSCL in classrooms should have 
spread rapidly. We all seriously underestimated the challenges of transforming technological 
infrastructure, cultivating CSCL practices and changing associated educational accountability 
regimes. The preceding theoretical perspectives indicate why implementation of CSCL will take 
longer:  
●      CSCL is a vision  of a future involving technologies, practices and research methods 
that guide inves tigators’ theory -building and intervention efforts. CSCL is an incomplete 
epistemic object (Knorr -Cetina, 2001) , which constantly raises new questions and 
becomes more complex as technologies, practices and methods develop unpredictably.  
●      CSCL is emb edded in rapidly expanded ecologies of socio -digital participation  that 
involve young people using technology intensively. Many young people use digital 
technologies for pursuing their interests together with their peers, experimenting with 
digital tools a nd making personal media productions. The challenge of CSCL is to 
promote connected learning in terms of also engaging students at school in creative and 
academic collaborative use of technology  for knowledge building  (Ito et al., 2013) . 
A theoretical and practical challenge is to determine what processes, methods and practices are 
needed for CSCL to penetrate deeply into educational systems. A handful of systematic efforts 
have produced promising results (e.g., Chan, 2011; Looi  et al. , 2011), but they have  been rare. 
Although there have been isolated CSCL classrooms sustained by committed teachers, the 
establishment and dissemination of rich collaboration cultures in schools remain elusive and 
prone to failure (Hakkarainen, 2009; Ritella & Hakkarainen, 2012 ). Advancement of the CSCL 
field requires a more comprehensive theoretical and practical understanding of the complex and 
dynamic relations between digital technologies, social practices and educational -transformation 
processes.  
Despite transformative CSCL  visions, new digital tools tend to be initially used to promote 
traditional practices of teaching or learning; radical innovative possibilities emerge only through 
sustained transformation of social practices (Hakkarainen, 2009). Successful implementation s 
of CSCL practices rely on systematic participatory transformations taking place through 
intensive research -practice partnerships. To effectively utilize CSCL practices, teachers and 
students must undergo “instrumental genesis” (Rabardel & Bourmaud, 2003) , integrating the 
CSCL tools into learning/teaching activities. This involves shaping, adapting and tailoring the 
CSCL tools and practices according to local needs and requirements by participants, as well as 
cultivating novel personal and group practices.  The process iteratively evolves the design of the 
tools to better facilitate intended practices and the creation of novel practices, tool usages and 
understandings by the participants.  
As students increasingly rely on technology in their everyday interaction, cognition and learning 
practices, approaches explored in CSCL research and theory may promote connected learning practices and, thereby, overcome the limitations of simplistic socia l-media apps. The result may 
be quite different from the experimental prototypes of classic CSCL research projects. Despite 
the complexity of the challenges, that is what it means to understand the CSCL vision as an 
epistemic object of global inquiry, rath er than as a summative evaluation of a well -defined object 
of study. Theories of CSCL should comprehend, envision and guide the targeted 
transformations and emergent technologies, practices and methods for achieving the CSCL 
vision . 
Additional Readings  
• Koschmann, T. (Ed.). (1996). CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm . 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  – This edited volume defined the beginnings of 
CSCL theory. It includes Koschmann’s discussion of the CSCL paradigm, Roschelle’s model 
of CSCL interaction analysis and Scardamalia & Bereiter’s argument for supporting 
collaborative learning, among other seminal papers.  
• Vygotsky, L. (1930). Mind in society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  – 
Vygotsky’s most important writings and no tes collected here present a vision of the theory of 
learning most influential in CSCL.  
• Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind: Three stages in the evolution of 
culture and cognitio n. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; Donald, M. (2001). A 
mind so rare: The evolution of human consciousness . New York, NY: W. W. Norton. – 
In these books, Donald presents culture as a rapid form of human evolution and extends the 
theory of learning to include external memories provided by digital technology.  
• Stahl,  G. (2020). Theoretical investigations: Philosophical foundations of group 
cognition . New York, NY: Springer.  –This edited volume brings together many of the past 
articles in the International Journal of CSCL  and recent essays by the journal’s editor that 
are most relevant to this chapter. Together, they point in the direction of CSCL theory 
indicated here for the future. See also (Medina & Stahl, this volume) and essays available 
at: http://gerrystahl.net/eli brary.  
• Hakkarainen, K. (2009). A knowledge -practice perspective on technology -mediated 
learning . International Journal of Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning. 4 (2), 213 -
231. – This article generalizes research experiences implementing CSCL in educati onal 
practices, expands knowledge building toward the trialogic approach to knowledge -creating 
learning and works out the notion of knowledge practices. See also (Paavola & 
Hakkarainen, this volume).  
References  
Akkerman, S., Bossche, P. V. d., Admiraal, W. , Gijselaers, W., Segers, M., Simons, R. -J. et al. 
(2007). Reconsidering group cognition: From conceptual confusion to a boundary area 
between cognitive and socio -cultural perspectives? Educational Research Review. 2 , 39–
63. Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogi c imagination: Four essays . Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press.  
Brown, A. (1992). Design experiments: Theoretical and methodological challenges in creating 
complex interventions in classroom settings. The Journal of the Learning Sciences. 2 (2), 
141-178. 
Chan, C. K. K. (2011). Bridging research and practice: Implementing and sustaining knowledge 
building in Hong Kong classrooms. International Journal of Computer -Supported 
Collaborative Learning. 6 (2), 147 -186. 
Chomsky, N. (1959). Review of verbal behavior , by B. F. Skinner. Language. 35 (1), 26 -57. 
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind: Three stages in the evolution of culture and 
cognition . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Donald, M. (2001). A mind so rare: The evolution of human consciousn ess. New York, NY: W. 
W. Norton.  
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity -theoretical approach to 
developmental research . Helsinki, Finland: Orienta -Kosultit Oy.  
Engeström, Y., Engeström, R.  & Suntio, A. (2002). Can a school community learn  to master its 
own future? In G. W. G. Claxton (Ed.), Learning for life in the 21st century.  (pp. 211 -224). 
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.  
Fenwick, T.  & Edwards, R. (2011). Introduction: Reclaiming and renewing actor network theory 
for educational research. Educational Philosophy and Theory 43 , 1-14. 
Gardner, H. (1985). The mind's new science: A history of the cognitive revolution . New York, 
NY: Basic Books.  
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall. 
Garfinkel, H.  & Sacks, H. (1970). On formal structures of practical actions. In J. Mckinney & E. 
Tiryakian (Eds.), Theoretical sociology: Perspectives and developments.  (pp. 337 -366). 
New York, NY: Appleton -Century -Crofts.  
Gigerenzer, G. (1994). Where do n ew ideas come from? In M. Boden (Ed.), Dimensions of 
creativity.  (pp. 53 -74). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  
Hakkarainen, K. (2009). A knowledge -practice perspective on technology -mediated learning. 
International Journal of Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning. 4 (2), 213 -231. 
Hegel, G. W. F. (1807). Phenomenology of spirit  (J. B. Baillie, Trans.). New York, NY: Harper & 
Row.  
Hillman, T.  & Säljö, R. (2016). Learning, knowing and opportunities for participation: 
Technologies and communicative practices. Learning, Media, and Technology. 41 , 306 -
309. 
Hutchins, E. (1996). Cognition in the wild . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  Ito, M., Gutiérrez, K., Livingstone, S., Penuel, W., Rhodes, J., Salen , K., Schor, J., Sefton -
Green, J., Watkins, S. (2013). Connected Learning: An Agenda for Research and Design . 
Irvine, CA: Digital Media . 
Jeong, H.  & Hmelo -Silver, C. E. (2016). Seven affordances of computer -supported collaborative 
learning: How to support collaborative learning? How can technologies help? Educational 
Psychologist. 51 (2), 247 -265. 
Jeong, H., Hmelo -Silver, C. E.  & Yu, Y. (2014). An examination of CSCL methodological 
practices and the influence of theoretical frameworks 2005 -2009. Internationa l Journal of 
Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning. 9 (3), 305 -334. 
Jordan, B.  & Henderson, A. (1995). Interaction analysis: Foundations and practice. Journal of 
the Learning Sciences. 4 (1), 39 -103. 
Kant, I. (1787). Critique of pure reason . Cambridge, U K: Cambridge University Press.  
Kienle, A.  & Wessner, M. (2006). The CSCL community in its first decade: Development, 
continuity, connectivity. International Journal of Computer -Supported Collaborative 
Learning. 1 (1), 9 -33. 
Knorr -Cetina, K. (2001). Objectua l practices. In K. -C. T. Schatzki, K.  & Von Savigny, E. (Ed.), 
The practice turn in contemporary theory (pp. 175 -188). London, UK: Routledge.  
Koschmann, T. (Ed.). (1996). CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm . Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum As sociates.  
Latour, B. (1996). On interobjectivity. Mind, Culture and Activity. 3 (4), 228 -245. 
Latour, B. (2007). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor -network -theory . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Latour, B.  & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.  
Lave, J.  & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Lehtinen, E., Hakkarainen, K., Lipponen, L., Rahikainen, M.  & Muukkonen, H. (1999). Computer 
supported collaborative learning: A review of research and development. Cl -net project . The 
J. H. G. I. Giesbers Reports on Education (vol 10): Department of Educational Sciences, 
University of Nijmegen.  
Lonchamp, J. (2012). Computational analysis and mapping of ijCSCL content. International 
Journal of Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning. 7 (4), 475 -497. 
Looi, C. -K., So, H. -J., Toh, Y.  & Chen, W. (2011). The Singapore experience: Synergy of 
national policy, classroom prac tice and design research. International Journal of Computer -
Supported Collaborative Learning. 6 (1), 9 -37. 
Marx, K. (1867). Capital  (B. Fowkes, Trans. Vol. I). New York, NY: Vintage.  
Ng, E.  & Bereiter, C. (1995). Three levels of goal orientation in learning . In A. R. D. B. Leake 
(Ed.), Goal -driven learning.  (pp. 355 – 380). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  Paavola, S.  & Hakkarainen, K. (2014). Trialogical approach for knowledge creation. In J. Tan S -
C., H. -J. & Yoe, J. (Ed.), Knowledge creation in education.  (pp. 53 -72). New York, NY: 
Springer.  
Packer, M.  & Goicoechea, J. (2000). Sociocultural and constructivist theories of learning: 
Ontology, not just epistemology. Educational Psychologist. 35 (4), 227 -241. 
Panadero, E.  & Järvelä, S. (2015). Socially shared regu lation of learning: A review. European 
Psychologist. 20 , 190 -203. 
Rabardel, P.  & Bourmaud, G. (2003). From computer to instrument system: A developmental 
perspective. Interacting with Computers. 15 , 665 –691. 
Ritella, G.  & Hakkarainen, K. (2012). Instrument al genesis in technology -mediated learning: 
From double stimulation to expansive knowledge practices. International Journal of 
Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning. 7 (2), 239 -258. 
Roth, W. M.  & Lee, Y. J. (2007). “Vygotsky’s neglected legacy”: Cultura l-historical activity 
theory. Review of educational research. 77 (2), 186 -232. 
Sacks, H. (1965). Lectures on conversation . Oxford, UK: Blackwell.  
Scardamalia, M. (2002). Collective cognitive responsibility for the advancement of knowledge. In 
B. Smith (Ed.) , Liberal education in a knowledge society.  Chicago, IL: Open Court.  
Scardamalia, M.  & Bereiter, C. (1996). Computer support for knowledge -building communities. 
In T. Koschmann (Ed.), CSCL: Theory and practice of an emerging paradigm.  (pp. 249 -
268). Hillsd ale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
Scardamalia, M.  & Bereiter, C. (2014). Knowledge building and knowledge creation: Theory, 
pedagogy and technology. In K. Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning 
sciences.  (2nd ed.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence organization in interaction: A primer in conversation analysis . 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Schneider, B.  & Pea, R. (2013). Real -time mutual gaze perception enhances collaborative 
learning and collaboration quality. International Journal of Computer -Supported 
Collaborative Learning. 8 (4), 375 -397. 
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. 
Educational Researcher. 27 (2), 4 -13. 
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Stahl, G. (2013). Translating Euclid: Designing a human -centered mathematics . San  Rafael, 
CA: Morgan & Claypool Publishers.  
Stahl, G. (2016). Constructing dynamic triangles together: The development of mathematical 
group cognition . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Stahl, G. (2020). Theoretical investigations: Philosophical fo undations of group cognition . New 
York, NY: Springer.  Tang, K. -Y., Tsai, C. -C. & Lin, T. -C. (2014). Contemporary intellectual structure of CSCL 
research (2006 -2013): A co -citation network analysis with an education focus. International 
Journal of Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning. 9 (3), 335 -363. 
Tomasello, M. (2014). A natural history of human thinking . Cambridge: MA: Harvard University 
Press.  
Vygotsky, L. (1930). Mind in society . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Wegerif, R. (2007). Dialogic , education and technology: Expanding the space of learning . New 
York, NY: Kluwer -Springer.  
Weinberger, A., Reiserer, M., Ertl, B., Fischer, F. & Mandl, H. (2005). Facilitating collaborative 
knowledge construction in computer -mediated learning environments  with cooperation 
scripts. In R. Bromme, F. Hesse & H. Spada (Eds.), Barriers and biases in computer -
mediated knowledge communication --and how they may be overcome.  Dordrecht, 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publisher.  
Wise, A. & Schwarz, B. (2017). Visions o f CSCL: Eight provocations for the future of the field. 
International Journal of Computer -Supported Collaborative Learning. 12 (4), 423 –467. 
Zhang, J., Tao, D., Chen, M. -H., Sun, Y., Judson, D. & Nagvi, S. (2018). Co -organizing the 
collective journey of inq uiry with idea thread mapper. The Journal of the Learning Sciences. 
27, 390 -430. 
  