Specifically PDF pages 124 to 202 
Marx and Heidegger  
  124 
PART III. MARTIN HEIDEGGER: 
META- ONTOLOGY AS 
INTERPRETATION AND 
TRANSFORMATION OF THE 
WORLD  
 
 
Martin He idegger thinking about transformations of Being.  

Marx and Heidegger  
  125 
Transitional Remarks  
Marx’s theory is intimately related to the social context of its times: to the 
establishment of the power of the bourgeoisie and the rise of an industrial proletariat, 
to the ensuing class conflicts and the concomitant crises of the capitalist economy. 
Heidegger’s thought also corresponds to his time, in particular to the technological 
advances surrounding World War II and the accompanying technification of social 
existence. The significant developments of the century which separates Marx from 
Heidegger, no t least of all in the form of the capitalist economic system, raises the 
question of Marx’s relevance to our world. Has society changed so drastically qual -
itatively and essentially that Marx’s categories no longer get to the root of the matter 
and that his critique is no longer fundamental? Is Heidegger for this reason justi fied 
in ignoring commodity relations as such in favor of a thorough and historical analysis of technological rational ity, reversing the relation of priority between what Marx 
occasion ally referred to as base and superstructure? Dialectic of Enlightenment  by 
Horkheimer and Adorno has demonstrated that it is possible to comprehend within 
a Marxian framework the development of technological rational ity from the early 
Greeks to German fascism and American pop culture. Heidegger, however, rejects 
such an approach, insisting on the need for a new set of essential categories, in fact, 
for a new language and a new comportment of investigation.  
The following chapters will present an i nterpretation of Heidegger’s central path of 
thought in his mature work. They will investigate how Heidegger’s system stands up 
to the standard set by Marx’s dialectical materialist method and the explanatory power 
of his theory. Guiding the inquiry will b e Adorno’s claim that Heidegger hypostatizes 
Being as divorced from beings. Whatever the conclusion, it cannot be considered final, because Heidegger’s important discussions of, for instance, language and the 
ontological difference must remain beyond the p resent scope. However, where such 
subsidiary topics contribute significantly to the problematic here, they should be expected to reappear within Heidegger’s central argument.  
The path of thought, according to Heidegger, is the questioning of Being. For the  
sake of a preliminary orientation, what Heidegger means by “Being” can be roughly 
approximated in a series of steps and through comparison with parts of Marx’s 
system. Being is the universal determination of beings as beings. In various historical 
periods  this determination has taken different forms so that all beings were present 
as, for instance, creations of God, objects for subjects or materials for labor. Being can thus, on first approximation, be considered the prevailing worldview  of an 
historical e ra, conceived, however, on an ontological rather than political or aesthetic 
level as an interpretation of all beings as such in general. But talk of worldviews  is too 
Marx and Heidegger  
  126 
subjective, leaving the decision on how to interpret beings up to the individual’s 
wager . 
Already in Being and Time (Sein und Zeit, hereafter referred to as SuZ) Being is treated 
as an a priori: prior to sub jective perception, beings are always already given as 
interpreted. But in SuZ, as part of its man -centered fundamental ontology, the 
objectivity of Being is reduced to the subject’s individual network of meanings, 
remaining subjective and individualistic even if prior to conscious choice. Even in 
SuZ, however, there is a tendency, devel oped in Heidegger’s later writings, to talk of 
man a s “being there” in a “clearing of Being.” This circumstance is prior to the 
hermeneutic “as” and can perh aps be con strued, as follows: b eings are present to 
people and as present are given with certain meanings. While these meanings  are to be 
attributed t o the subject ’s manifold of signification, the presence  of the beings is 
independent of this subjective hermeneutic sieve, prior to it. “Being” applies to this 
latter level, as the determination of the character of the presence of beings as given 
beings in  general, not as the determination of the meaning of individual beings or 
even of the system of their possible meanings. The question of Being is a reflection upon presence.  
Heidegger represents his task as retrospective first phil osophy, which tries to u ncover 
the fundamentals through systematic and historic backtracking . But the important 
motivation of his project lies elsewhere. The question of Being would be an academic 
matter if Being were immutable. But Being is subject to historic variation and its 
historic forms overlap at any given time. The questioning of Being is propelled by a 
yearning for a ne w epoch of Being, whose coming entails sorting out the 
contemporary forms of Being, which obscure their own history and interconnections. 
Of special conce rn is the reified form of Being which is associated with our 
technological epoch. In SuZ this form is criticized as inadequate under the category 
of presence -to-hand in contrast to readiness -to-hand or the ecstatic temporal 
structure of human existence. La ter, technological “stock” is opposed to a dynamic 
conception of the thing.  
Marx’s thought can also be understood in terms of this ques tion of Being. Marx is 
concerned with beings insofar as they are products of human labor. Thus,  it is clear 
that for him  beings are determined by human labor in accordance with human 
intentions, needs and capabilities. This differs little from Heidegger’s discussion of 
the manifold of meanings, which focused on the pre -capitalist workshop to develop 
the non- capitalist conce pt of readiness- to-hand in relation to the individual’s project, 
meaning structure and interpersonal relations. The difference is that Marx’s analysis 
– in addition to and related to having more concrete social content – is socio-
historically specific. In moving now to a comparison of Marx and Heidegger on the 
presence of beings as such, rather than on the determination of individual beings, 
both the similarity and the contrast remain. As socially produced, beings have a 
general character of presence which corresponds to the socially prevalent mode of 
Marx and Heidegger  
  127 
production, to the unity of the technical forces and social relation of production. The 
epochal history of Being corresponds to that of social production.  Further, the important 
motivation behind Marx’s analysi s lies in the contemporary contradiction between 
two ontological forms: use value and exchange value. The point is to reconcile these 
through a “social value” form of beings. Because Being corresponds to the mode of 
production, the reign of social value pr esupposes the rearrangement of the forces of 
production developed under capitalism (the industrial revolution and subsequent technology) in accordance with transformed, post -capitalist social relations.  
Marx’s work can be understood as an ontological inves tigation and thus as an alternative to 
Heidegger.  The form of value, whose analysis is so central to Capital , is an ontological 
category, a determination of the Being of commodities, of their form of presence. 
Commodities are given as use values and as labor values, as embodiments of useful 
labor and of abstract labor. This historical ontological determination is social. It has a base in economic structure and economic history, as Marx shows in his sharp 
dialectic of the form of value, in his entire analysis of the real process of exchange (in 
production, circulation and the total economic process) and in his retrospective 
history of property relations, whose perspective was designed to show the historic 
determination of the commodity form.  
The methodology o f Marx’s critical social theory as hermeneutic ontology provides a 
point of reference in the investigation of the Heideggerian alternative. Of particu lar 
importance is the relation of Being to beings, which in Marx takes the form of the 
relation of the ab stract to the concrete, as mediated by historically specific  concepts. 
In the Grundrisse, general (trans -historical) concepts are abstractions from the mere 
concrete historically specific  concepts. In Capital , on the other hand, historically 
specific  excha nge value is derivative of the essential labor value, being merely one 
form of the appearance of this abstract essence. The mediation of these opposed relations takes place through Marx’s two -way trip from the concrete to the abstract 
and then back to the concrete, but now criticized as limited in terms of the abstract 
potentials. Marx’s abstractions, which are necessary for a critical stance – for 
distinguishing second nature from the natural and forms of appearance from the essential – are themselves arri ved at through the concrete appearances, which are 
thereby critiqued. Without resorting to arbitrary or external metaphysical frameworks of interp retation, Marx satisfies the need for abstract concepts, trans -historical 
categories and essential characteri stics in accordance with the hermeneutic principle 
of basing interpretation upon the subject matter itself, explicating what is most 
appropriate to it.  
The following chapters trace Heidegger’s attempt to uncover the Being of beings through appropriate inte rpretation of beings. Heidegger’s thought is followed through 
three lectures which present the development of his mature system, emphasizing his response to the problematic just discussed in terms of Marx. This problematic is 
unavoidable for any truly post -Hegelian, historical, hermeneutic ontology.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  128 
 
 
The author in 2002,  visiting the hut where Being and Time  was written.  

Marx and Heidegger  
  129 
Chapter VII: The Work  
The Art Work and History  
In Germany of the mid -1930’s, with the life -and-death struggle between Hitler’s 
National Socialists and an active communist movement, the question of how the 
character of future society would be determined was no academic matter. Taken 
within this context,  Heidegger’s 1935 essay on art can be interpreted as a philosophic 
approach to the burning issue. Heidegger does not assume that history is determined by political worldviews  which are backed by political power, but raises the ontological 
question in its h istorical form: How is the character of a given historical era 
determined; specifically, how was ours determined and how is the coming era already 
being determined? Heidegger phrases his approach to this problem in terms of art: Is 
art an “origin” of histo rical ontological change? Comprehension of his answer to this 
question presupposes a careful reading of Heidegger’s purposefully ambiguous essay on the origin of the work of art.  
While no interpretation of Heidegger’s thought can ignore Being and Time, any  final 
evaluation must be based on his subsequent reversal of the position stated there. In 
SuZ Heidegger founds the revelation of being in the labor of man, human praxis : the 
involved Being -in-the-world of Dasein . This relationship of founding was mediate d by 
a concept of truth as discoveredness. “Being (not beings) are given only insofar as 
truth is. And truth only is if and when Dasein  is.”
108 The notion of fundamental 
ontology as the analytic of Dasein  seemed to be a primary methodological principle of 
Heidegger’s ontology.  
However, from the perspective of Heidegger’s later writ ings – the perspective upon 
which our considerations will be based – the analysis of Dasein  provides no foundation 
for building a philosophical system in the sense of Descartes’ cogito sum, but rather a 
point of departure for a path of thought along which such preliminary relationships 
must be reinterpreted and reversed as part of a reversal of thought. This reversal takes 
place repeatedly on many levels: in the difference between the tradition of 
metaphysics and Heid egger’s own thought, through the development from Being and 
Time (1927) to Time and Being  (1962), foreshadowed in the early distinction between 
inauthentic and authentic, by the twists in dialectical sentences, thanks to the 
 
108 Being and Time , §44. p. 272. Cf. Sein und Zeit , S. 230.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  130 
ambiguity of phrases betokening possession and by means of the reinterpret ation of 
individual concepts.  
The reversal of thought can be followed effectively in terms of Heidegger’s lecture, 
The Origin of the Work of Art . This work, in fact a pivotal  point in the author’s ouvre, 
makes a well- considered break with metaphysics by question ing Hegel’s seminal 
philosophy of art, rejecting the subjectivism of traditional aesthetics and deserting the 
royal road to knowledge in favor of lingering along the o vergrown and forgotten dead -
end trails, the intellectual Holzwege . In the reversal of the meaning of the lecture’s title, 
the origin of the work, or of the equivalent phrase, the setting -itself- into-work of truth, 
the subjectivistic standpoint – not yet su fficiently overcome in SuZ, where Dasein  is 
still a foundation – is surpassed. We shall take this specific example of Heidegger’s 
reversal as a model for concretely understanding the abstract formulations in which 
Heidegger presents his final position.  
The traditional characterization of the work of art is in terms of a person, either the 
creator or the audience, for whom the work is a representation, a second presentation, 
of something that was already present, revealed, discovered for someone as an object  
or idea. In the language of SuZ, “Revelation is an essential mode of being of Dasein . . .. 
Beings are only then discovered and only revealed as long as Dasein  is at all.”109 Because 
discovery or revelation is commonly taken to be essentially a function of man, an art 
work can only present what its human creator has discovered and its human audience 
rediscovers. As such, a work of art can transmit  truth, but nothing more; the o rigin of 
the work of art as a conveyor of truth is then its creator, the artist, human subjectivity: 
Dasein . 
 
 
109 Ibid., p. 269, S. 226.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  131 
 
Heidegger’s first step in his analysis of the origin of the work of art is to move away 
from the traditional character ization by citing an experience in which a work reveals 
truth independently:  
Van Gogh’s painting is an opening -up of that which the tool, the 
pair of farmer’s boots, in truth is. This being moves into the 
unconcealment of its being . . .. There is a happening of truth at work 
in the work, if an opening -up of the being takes place there into that 
which and that how it is.110 
Somehow, claims Heidegger, the oil painting of the peasant woman’s shoes itself reveals the nature of the shoes as serviceable and reliable tools in the farmer’s world. 
Such a revelation is often reserved for philosophical contemplation and even SuZ 
restricts it to the understanding of Dasein ; but in the preceding quotation it appears to 
be the work of an art work. Art is then characterized by Heidegger as the setting -into-
work of the truth of the being, where the “setting” cannot be understood as a human 
act of placing already understood truth into an artful representation, but rather the 
essential function of the work itself is to discover on its own and to present for the 
first time the truth about something. 
What we have paraphrased as “presenting” the t ruth about something, Heidegger 
more precisely names an opening -up of the being in what and how it is. This phrase 
 
110 Martin Heide gger, “The origin of the work of art,” in Philosophies of Art and Beauty , 
ed. Hofstadter & Kuhns (New York: Modern Library, 1964), p. 664f. Cf. Martin 
Heidegger, “Der Unsprung des Kunstwerkes” in Holzwege  (Frankfurt: Klostermann, 
1963), S. 25.  

Marx and Heidegger  
  132 
refers back to the origin in the essay’s first sentence as that from which and through 
which something is what and how it is. The title of th e essay cannot be understood 
according to the traditional notion of art, where the artist is the origin of the work, 
but must already be seen to point to the origin -character of the work itself: the work 
of art as origin of truth.  
Van Gogh’s painting evoke s a whole world of relationships in which the shoes which 
it pictured must, as tools, stand. Heidegger then applies this notion of a world of 
relation ships to the work itself and asks how a work of art is situated within its world. 
Is the painting to be c onsidered in terms of its surroundings in a museum, in its 
creator’s biography and ouvre, or in its social and historical circum stances? Heidegger’s 
answer is that the world of the work is not independently present, but is itself 
determined or revealed by  the work. The work belongs solely in the region which is 
opened up by the work itself. This is because the “working” of a work takes place 
only in such opening up.  
In revealing the truth about some being, a work is self -revelatory, revealing itself and 
opening up a realm for itself which it also reveals. All art is, one could say, dramatic, 
opening a stage within, yet separated from mundane reality, a space and a framework 
of significance in which the truth which the work reveals can stand out obtrusively.  
The work of art is the origin of stage, script and message, of its world and itself as 
well as its “object.” It sets itself into the work of presenting truth about something 
which it is not.  
Even beyond its self -revelatory character, the work of art is th e revelation of the world 
of an historical people, says Heidegger:  
The temple as an architectural work joins and gathers around itself 
the unity of those paths and relations in which birth and death, illness 
and blessing, victory and disgrace, endurance and decay win the form 
and the run of human nature in its destiny. The persisting breadth of 
these open relations is the world of this historical people. From and 
through them it first comes to itself and back to the completion of 
its determinations.111 
To de termine what is meant by this function of art is the central problem of our 
investigation. What revelation of the truth of the being or of being meant in Heidegger’s pronounce ments is far from clear, and the claim that this is the essential 
function of ar t must remain unsupported until this is clarified.  
Whether the reversal of thought has at least been suggested in its full scope or whether 
only the first steps have been noted has yet to be determined. Perhaps most urgent is 
to interpret the significance of the work of art as origin of the world of an historical 
 
111 Ibid., p. 669, S. 31.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  133 
people. If a temple gathers together and joins for the first time the dimensions of 
history, has it then created the unity of the times or merely reflected it? Is the 
revelation of an historical wo rld merely the re -presentation – perhaps for the first time 
making conscious – of what already exists and determines the life of man whether he 
is aware of it or not? Or are the historical alternatives formed and selected in works of art , among 
other ways, so that the work of art is the origin of the world we live in as well as the 
work’s own world? This problem poses the crucial question of Heidegger’s thinking 
about Being in nuce. There may be no better way of under standing his position than 
to interpret  carefully what he has to say about the relationship of art to history.  
Art and Being  
At the close of the preceding section, the possibility was proposed that the work of 
art may in some way represent prevailing relationships without in any manner 
changing  the structure of reality. An art work would then provide a unity in 
accordance with its aesthetic form for the material which is historically given independently of the work. The realm of art would be a medium for the trans mission 
of interpretations of t he world, but not a creative source of new interpretations.  
This possibility seems, however, to be immediately rejected by Heidegger. The Greek tragedy, for instance, was no simple allegorical representation of the battles of the 
gods or of the moral cosmi c order by actors on the stage. Pre -existing gods were not 
described nor were ethical values indoctrin ated; rather, the gods were brought into 
existence and the values determined in the drama itself; they were created and formed 
there, to be preserved in  the language and tradition of tragedy.  
In the tragedy, nothing is presented, rather the battle of the new gods 
against the old is waged. When the linguistic work appears in the 
speech of a people, it does not talk about this battle, but transforms 
the speech of the people so that now every essential word wages this 
battle and places in question what is holy and what is unholy, what 
large or small, courageous or weak, exalted or fickle, master or 
slave.
112 
The artistic presentation cannot be separated from i ts creative and formative 
functions: Zeus cannot appear on stage as a nondescript pawn in the action, but can 
only be Zeus as holy, grand, courageous, exalted and masterly.  
 
112 Ibid., p. 670, S. 32.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  134 
When a temple is erected to Zeus, the erecting includes consecrating, which is 
declaring the holy as holy. Consecra tion means making holy in the sense that in the 
erecting of the work the holy is opened up as holy and God is called into the openness 
of its presence. Just as Dasein ’s understanding always reveals beings as already 
interpr eted, so the work of art is necessarily an interpretation of that which it presents.  
Dasein , according to SuZ, reveals and relates to beings as already interpreted within a 
framework of meanings called its world. This world is a part of Dasein ’s existentia l 
structure, a hermeneutic sieve for relating to other beings, not the totality of these 
other beings themselves. Heidegger analyses the being of a work of art much as he 
analyzed Dasein  – as a being which, unlike beings present -at-hand and ready- to-hand, 
erects a world in which truth is opened up and beings are revealed: to be a work means 
to erect a world. Naturally the ontological analyses of man and art are not identical, 
the former having an ecstatic care structure and the latter merely the structure o f the 
setting -itself- into-work of truth; however, they both have a world, in the one case 
disclosed, in the other erected.  
The question now is: If the world of Dasein  is part of his structure and that of the 
work of art part of its, then do these two world s have any relation to each other? What 
did the world of the tragedy have to do with the Greek’s world and what does the 
world of van Gogh’s canvas have to do with our world? We have already heard that 
tragedy raised into question what is holy and unholy, what large and small, etc. 
Presumably the decisions reached by the tragedy are important for us.  
In connection with the work’s erecting of a world, for instance, Heidegger says, 
“Where the essential decisions of our history come to pass, are taken over by us and 
left behind, forgotten and again sought, there the world is worlding.”113 Our history, 
the history of mankind, is thus viewed in terms of crucial changes in our interpretive 
framework, in our world. One way in which these changes are brought about is 
through the work of art. What the world of the work undergoes in the way of decisive 
changes is transmitted to the world of people when it is taken over by people in their 
relationship to the work. In the role of preservers of the truth which a work revea ls, 
people join each other and the work in a common historical process.  
For the preservation of the work does not isolate men with their 
individual experiences, but pulls them into a relation of belonging to 
the truth which happens in the work. Thereby, me n’s being for and 
with one another is grounded as the historical exstasis of Dasein  out 
of relation to unconcealment.114 
 
113 Ibid., p. 671, S. 33.  
114 Ibid., p. 690, S. 55f.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  135 
The character of historical decisions is now somewhat clar ified. History, for 
Heidegger, consists in changes in the relationship of man to the unconcealment of 
beings. This does not contradict the talk about changes in the world, but rather 
explains the possibility of changes in the framework of the meaning of be ings in terms 
of the revealing and concealing of changing aspects of beings. The effectiveness of the work does not, according to Heidegger, consist in an effect. Rather, it rests in a 
change which arises out of the work, a change, however, of the unconcea lment of 
beings, i.e., a change of Being.
115 
The work’s relationship to the interpretation of beings motivated Heidegger to say 
that the essence of art is poetry, for “language is the house of Being” in the sense that 
the interpretation of something as something, the hermeneutic  as, is fundamentally 
linguistic, even in its non -thematized, pre -predicative stage (cf. SuZ §32). Language is 
thus the central dimension of history for Heidegger. His historical reconstructions 
trace the translations of ideas from la nguage to language (Greek, Latin and various 
stages of German) and from writer to writer (Parmenides, Plato, Aristotle, Hegel, Nietzsche), while his own struggle to reverse the history of thought is fought in terms 
of reinterpreting grammar, phrases and k ey terms of metaphysics.  
The ability of art to set truth into work is now formulated as follows: truth as the clearing and concealing of beings takes place as poetry. Art has to do with the 
revealing and concealing of beings because art, as essentially poe tic, is linguistic in 
nature. Here language is not understood by Heidegger as a system of spoken or written symbols which express attributes and relations of already present beings. 
Rather, language not only further determines what is already manifest or c oncealed as 
so interpreted by means of words and sentences, but language brings the being as a 
being into the open in the first place. What poetry does linguistically to open up a 
world in which beings are named as beings, as so and so interpreted, every w ork of 
art does in its own way. The work’s interpretations are creative, original. They replace 
the mundane clichés of the familiar world and thereby bring beings obtrusively into 
focus in a new way. Due to the poetic nature of art, it happens that the wor k of art 
breaks out an open place in the midst of beings, a place in whose openness everything 
is different from everywhere else. By clearing an opening for a new interpretation of 
beings, art plays a key role in the movement of history. The harmonic order  of Greek 
art, the religiosity of medieval works and the subjectivistic perspective of art since the Renaissance can be seen in relation to the prevailing inter pretations of beings 
throughout history:  
Whenever beings as a whole, as beings, require groundi ng in 
openness, art attains to its historical essence as institution. This 
happened in the West for the first time in Greece. What was to be 
called Being was defin itively set into work. The beings as a whole 
 
115 Ibid., p. 693, S. 59.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  136 
which were thereby revealed were then changed i nto beings in the 
sense of creations of God. This happened in the Middle Ages. These 
beings were again changed at the start of and during the modern age. 
Beings became calculably controllable and transparent objects. Each 
time, a new and essential world br oke out. Each time, the openness 
of beings had to be erected through the fixation of truth in the Gestalt, in the beings them selves. Each time, the unconcealment of 
beings happened. The unconcealment set itself to work and art 
accomplished this setting.
116 
Thus far we have given Heidegger a “nominalist” interpretation. Being is nothing 
beyond the characteristic of individual beings as interpreted as beings. Being thus 
changes when the totality of beings is differently interpreted within the world shared 
by people and works of art. In the classical age beings were beings as parts of a 
harmoniously ordered cosmos; in the Middle Ages as creations of God; and recently 
as calculable material. Historical change is produced by beings themselves, such as 
works of ar t, not by external forces. Such a nominalist interpretation which gives 
beings a priority over Being, is a plausible one for all of Heidegger’s writings. This may be due to the hermetic principle of phenomenology, “to the things themselves,” 
which is repea tedly referred to and adhered to in Heidegger’s analyses. Where SuZ’s 
search for the wholeness of Dasein  confined all within Dasein ’s own existential 
structures (Being -in-the-world. Being -with, temporality), the analysis of the work of 
art tries to retain earth and world, creator and preserver, beings and truth firmly within 
the art work’s internal structure as the setting -itself- into-work of truth.  
The nominalist interpretation is, however, problematic. Most of the ontological 
structures of a being point t o other beings and, even overlooking this, Heidegger’s 
attempt repeatedly fails, as he admits in the midst of his essay on art: “The attempt to 
determine the work -character of the work purely out of itself has shown itself to be 
impossible.”
117 But certainl y the crucial question is how to understand a history shared 
by all beings in terms of an ontology of monads without a god to insure harmony. 
How is it, that is, that the manifold worlds of all people and all art works in a given 
historical period share a single interpretation of beings, a common meaning of Being? 
This question demands a second look at Heidegger’s essay on art.  
 
116 Ibid., p. 697, S. 63f.  
117 Ibid., p. 682, S. 46; Cf. p. 667, S. 29.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  137 
The Primacy of Being  
The previous chapter’s interpretation was a desperate attempt to rescue Heidegger 
from a mystical position. In  line with the nominalist tendency, everything that 
smacked of metaphysics, which  referred to something that cannot be grasped in the 
hands and reckoned with, was argued away at the expense of any ability to understand 
history. Whatever value this approach  to Heidegger may have, and whatever it has in 
fact revealed of his position, it cannot be considered the whole story, even in outline form. On the basis of such an interpretation we will never be able to explain the 
crucial fact that in each historical ag e there is a prevailing meaning of Being. To fail 
to see Heidegger’s struggle with this question would be to miss the whole thrust of 
his thought.  
Heidegger approaches his question of Being and beings by way of a reflection on truth. SuZ argued that propos itional truth is only possible if the beings denoted have 
been revealed beforehand. This prerequisite revelation was considered in terms of human Dasein ’s Being- in-the-world. Associating revelation with Dasein , SuZ claimed 
that truth is only in so far and  as long as Dasein  is. However, in discussing art and 
truth, Heidegger shows that this revel ation can also be a function of the work of art 
as the setting -into-work of truth, where truth is taken in its primordial sense of 
revelation, precondition for pro positional truth. Whereas in SuZ Heidegger stressed 
the role of Dasein  in the revelation of truth, in The Origin of the Work of Art  he underlines 
the passivity or receptivity of Dasein  in this role: “But it is not we who presuppose the 
unconcealment of bei ngs, rather the uncon cealment of beings determines us in such 
an essential way that we are always placed after unconcealment in our concep tions. 
Not only that toward which knowledge is directed must already be somehow 
unconcealed, but also the entire reg ion in which this directedness toward something 
moves and also that for which an adequation of a sentence to the subject matter is 
manifested must already take place as a whole within unconcealment.”
118 
A reversal in thinking has switched the significance o f the fact that propositional truth 
requires the unconcealment of its object and of that object’s world from: 
propositional truth presupposes Dasein , to: Dasein , in order to know any thing, 
presupposes primordial truth as unconcealment of beings. Extended to the work of 
art, this means that the work does not create its world in erecting it, but the work 
presupposes an already given world. Furthermore, to truth as unconcealment belongs 
its battle with concealment. The clearing of Being which is constitutive of Dasein  and 
of the work is determined by an unconcealment, which is in turn characterized by a self-concealing concealment. “Concealment conceals and displaces itself. That is, the 
open place in the midst of beings, the clearing, is never an empty stage with contin -
uously parted curtain on which the play of beings plays itself out. Rather, clearing 
 
118 Ibid., p. 677, S. 41.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  138 
happens as this double con cealment. Unconcealment of beings is never a merely 
present circumstance, but a happening.”119 
This processual notion of truth as the  interplay of concealment and unconcealment 
is absolutely central to Heidegger’s thought, from his conception of phenomenology 
(cf. §7 of SuZ) to that of the Ereignis  hinted at in his mature essay on Time and Being . 
The relationship of such truth to the w ork of art, theme of the essay on art, is an 
exemplary analysis of the relationship of Being to beings. The kernel of the analysis is 
presented in a single paragraph, worth quoting at some length.  
Truth is the primordial battle, in which the open is fought  for in one 
way or another, in which everything stands and out of which 
everything holds itself back that shows itself and erects . . .. The 
openness of this which is open (truth) can only be what it is, namely this openness, if and as long as it arranges i tself in its opening. 
Therefore there must always be a being in this opening, in which the openness can take its stand and gain fixity . . .. With the reference to 
the openness arranging itself in the opening, thought reaches a realm that cannot yet be anal yzed here. Only this is remarked: that if the 
essence of unconcealment of beings belongs in any way to Being -
itself (cf. SuZ  §44), then the latter on the basis of its essence lets the 
play-space of openness (the clearing of the there) happen and brings 
to pass that in which every being comes to pass in its own way.
120 
Here we can distinguish two basic theses on the relationship of Being to beings. The 
thesis extensively thematized in this section of the essay is: openness (world, truth, 
clearing, Being) can only be what it is if and when it is arranged in a being within  the 
opening. Taken together with the previous premise about primordial truth – that for 
a being to be discovered presupposes an openness – this thesis implies a dialectical 
relationship between Being and beings, in which each both “presupposes” and 
“deter mines” the other. The second thesis is only touched upon in the art essay, to 
be developed in later writings,121 namely: Being -itself has a priority; out of its own 
essence – i.e., unaffected by beings – it opens the clearing in which beings can appear. 
In this second thesis, the dialectical relationship is largely lost in favor of a linear chain 
of command from Being -itself (the Ereignis ) to Being (as the Being of beings), to 
beings. 
 
119 Ibid., p. 678, S. 42.  
120 Ibid., p. 684, S. 49.  
121 Cf. the later edition of Heidegger’s essay, Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes  (Stuttgart: 
Reclam, 1960), S. 99, and Martin Heidegger, “Zeit und Sein” in Zur Sache des Denkens  
(Tübingen: Niemayer, 1969), p. 43, S. 46.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  139 
These various theses can be ordered as successive interpretations of the e ssay’s title 
which follow Heidegger’s reversal of thought. “The origin of the work of art” can be 
under stood in the following ways:  
1. The artist, in forming matter into the work, and the audience, in experiencing 
the work’s psychological effects, are its or igin. 
2. The work is an origin, namely of the truth about its object.  
3. The work is its own origin as that of its world.  
4. The work and the clearing in which it stands are – dialectically – each other’s 
origin. 
5. Being- itself is the origin of the work in which it s ets itself into work.  
The remainder of our analysis of the essay on art will be concerned explicitly with the 
last two of these theses, the others representing the criticized philosophical positions 
of commonsensical approaches and previous thinkers.  
The t ruth, Heidegger says, is not written in the stars to begin with and then 
concretized, objectified, displayed, represented, made visible, brought down to earth 
in the form of an art work. Primordial truth as a clearing and the work as a being in 
the clearin g go together like two sides of a coin. Clearing of openness and erecting in 
the opening belong together; they are both the essence of the happening of truth. The emphasis here upon the mutual dependence of truth and work as presuppositions of 
each other i s shifted to an analysis of truth alone as a process, where the clearing and 
the work are both aspects of its essence.  
With the incorporation of the work within the structure of truth, the work becomes 
a merely formal requirement for truth which has no eff ect on its content: “Because it 
belongs to the essence of truth to erect itself in beings in order to bring truth into work, therefore the relation  to the work lies in the essence of truth as a special possibility 
of truth to come into work in the midst of  beings.”
122 The phrase, “relation to the 
work,” was italicized in the 1960 edition of the essay to emphasize that the work was to be considered in terms of the structure of truth (not unlike the way SuZ considered 
objects in terms of Dasein ’s existential s tructure with its inherent relations to objects 
through its world) and that what came to be among beings was truth itself and not 
merely another being, perhaps influenced by but distinct from truth.
123 
It almost seems as if truth created the work in order t o come into existence itself. 
Heidegger’s definition of creating is indeed an extreme anti -anthropocentrism: 
“Arranging truth in the work is the bringing forth of a particular being, which never 
 
122 Ibid., p. 685, S. 50; italics as in later  edition, S. 98.  
123 Cf. later edition, S. 98.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  140 
was before and never will be afterwards. This bringing forth places the being in the 
opening in such a way that that which is to be brought is the first to clear the openness 
of the opening into which it comes forth. Where the bringing forth itself brings the 
openness of beings (truth), that which is brought forth i s a work. Such bringing forth 
is creating.”124 
It still sounds like a dialectical formulation when some thing clears the opening it 
requires in the very act of filling it. However, as Heidegger is quick to add, what seems 
like pulling oneself up by the bootstraps is in truth flowing along with the tide. The 
force of the dialectic is annihilated, although the form is retained, because the outcome is determined in advance – if not externally, at least one- sidedly. The being 
does not create its Being, the w ork its truth, in bringing it forth; rather, as this bringing, 
it is more a receiving and accepting within the relation to unconcealment. Unconcealment, truth in the primordial sense, determines the character of the clearing 
and of the beings: the meaning of its Being, whether it is present in the Greek, 
medieval or modern sense. What has traditionally been taken as a formal requirement – when considered at all – in the sense that the presence in an opening which is 
necessarily common to all beings was neve r thought to have any content, now treats 
the being which it makes possible as its own formal requirement, to which it lends the 
content. This move is part of Heidegger’s reversal of perspective, from a concern with 
beings to an emphasis on Being as prior.  
From this new perspective, the creating and preserving of the work of art are 
reinterpreted in terms of the ambiguity of the characterization of the essence of art as 
the passive/active setting -itself- into-work of truth. Heidegger understands this 
charact erization as follows: “On the one hand, it says art is the establishment of self -
arranging truth in a Gestalt. This happens in creation as the bringing forth of the 
unconcealment of beings. But setting -itself- into-work also means bringing the 
workhood into  motion. This happens as preservation. Therefore, art is the creative 
preservation of truth in the work. Thus,  art is a becoming and happening of truth.”
125 
The creation of unconcealment is by no means arbitrary; it merely gives to a pre -given 
character of unconcealment a concrete form and specifies in detail this one instance 
of unconcealment.  
The general character of the unconcealment, the issues that are really at stake, is 
predetermined and merely brought out – not into the light, but as the light. In br inging 
truth out in a concretely structured form, the work comes into action as a work and preserves the truth. This working of the work is, however, the working of truth 
coming into work in the work. It is truth which sets itself into work in the work, at  
 
124 Ibid., p. 685, S. 50.  
125 Ibid., p. 693, S. 59.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  141 
least as much as it is set into the work by the work or by the work’s human creator or 
audience.126 
The primacy of truth as already determined in content before the dialectic of truth 
and work is as clear in Heidegger’s formulation, “poetry is the essence of art,” as in 
his other formulations in terms of origin and setting -into-work. Poetry, as naming, brings 
to expression the Being of beings; it does not participate in the creation of their Being. Poetry provides 
language in which Being can articulate itse lf, it explores this language,  and it enunciates it, but the 
poetic work does not participate in the epochal changes in Being as such  (the thrower in 
Heidegger’s metaphor). “Such saying is a projection of clearing, in which it is said 
what the being will c ome into the open as. Projection is the result of a throw, which 
is the way in which unconcealment sends itself into beings as such.”127 The work’s 
poetic thrust merely carries out the cast of the die in which unconcealment delivers itself into the being. T he chips are placed long after the cast has been, unknown to the 
players, determined. How the being will appear in the opening is already decided by a cast which is not part of the dialectical game played by truth and the work, but which 
rather preconditio ns it. 
Art, then, is not the creation of truth, not the origin and inspiration of history, but 
rather – as the concrete setting -into-work and poetic naming of that which is 
primordial –  the means of executing a pre -given destiny.  
Whenever art happens, that  is, when there is a beginning, a thrust 
emerges in history. History begins anew. History does not here mean 
a sequence of events, however import ant, in time. History is the 
transporting of a people into its appointed task as entrance into what has been g iven along with that people.
128 
Art is one of the several ways in which truth, proposed for “an historical folk,” is 
consummated in marriage with beings. Other historical media are the action which 
founds a state (politics), the nearness to the “being- est” of beings (God), the essential 
sacrifice (Christ), thought’s questioning which names Being in its question -ableness 
(Heidegger’s philosophy).129 Whence art receives its historical mission and why the 
work of art plays a special role in Heidegger’s conceptio n of history are questions 
which will be considered in the following chapters in terms of other Heideggerian 
analyses. Heidegger’s closing verse taken from Hölderlin may serve here as a transition 
from art as an origin to the art work as placeholder . 
 
126 Cf. later edition, S. 100.  
127 Ibid., p. 695, S. 61.  
128 Ibid., p. 697, S. 64.  
129 Cf. ibid., p. 685, S. 50.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  142 
Reluc tantly departs  
That which dwells near the origin, from the place.130 
 
 
130 Ibid., p. 699, S. 65.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  143 
Chapter VIII: The Thing  
Thing and Stock  
Heidegger’s recent essay on sculpture, Space and Art  (1969), a kind of third epilogue 
to the lecture we have been analyzing, provides on its conclu ding page a concise 
statement of the role of art,  
Sculpture: an embodying bringing -into-work of places and with this 
an opening up of realms of possible living for men, of possible 
persisting for the things which surround and concern men.  
Sculpture: the em bodiment of the truth of Being in its place -
instituting work.131 
Sculpture creates space in the forms which comprise a piece of sculpture as well as in 
the surrounded forms and the encompassing region. This creating is a meaningful 
structuring which has its meaning in terms of a world of people and things, the very 
world which finds its place to exist in the space created by this sculpture. The dialectic at work here is, however, suppressed by Heidegger in this essay, so that the first 
sentence quoted abo ve already prepares the way for the ontological pronouncement 
which immediately follows. The work of art merely embodies an externally given truth 
of Being by providing a place for it.  
 
131 Martin Heidegger, Raum und Kunst  (St. Gallen: Erker Verlag), 1969), S. 13.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  144 
 
In the transition from the one sentence to the other, a reversal of t hought takes place 
which robs even the initial stage of its fullness – the reversal which necessitated the 
preceding chapter’s reinterpretation. The fullness of content which makes each piece 
of sculpture what it, as a unique work, is, is abstracted away u ntil just the universal 
form of one of its functions remains: the creation of place. The emptiness of this 
characterization is then filled by Being. The original fullness of content does not, 
however, go unnoticed by Heidegger elsewhere; long descriptive p assages repeatedly 
sing its praise in romantic tones. This contrast restates the paradox which the present 
chapter must unravel.  
Throughout his writings, Heidegger takes up from different perspectives the dialectic 
between the opening of space, the living of man and the enduring of things. The old 
bridge in Heidelberg, the church bells on Christmas morn, the forest path of his 
childhood, the jug wet with Rhine wine and the sculptures of Giaocometti provide 
the material models which complement the linguistic  ones of poetry and philosophy. 
The work of art is creatio par excellence : both traditionally as human creation for its own 
sake and ontologically as the creation of a place, be it for a simultaneously created 
world or for the embodiment of a given being.  
The creation of space which takes this task as a conscious  goal is, however, no longer 
fine art but architecture, building; where the two coincide – in the Greek temple, for 
instance – this is only possible because the practical goal -orientation is not tot al. 
Building, too, in its own way, provides a place for a world. A house is such a building 
and so is a bridge.  

Marx and Heidegger  
  145 
The bridge is clearly a special kind of thing ( Ding); for it gathers 
(versammelt) the Four ( Geviert) in such a way that it permits it a position . 
But only what is itself a place (Ort) can encompass a position . . .. A 
space is something encompassed, released within a bound ary, the 
Greek peras. The boundary is not that at which something ends, but, 
as the Greeks recognized, the boundary is that fro m which 
something begins its essence . . .. Something encompassed is always 
permitted and unified, that is, gathered by a place, that is, by a thing 
similar to the bridge . . .. The bridge is a place. As such a thing, it 
permits a space, in which earth and h eaven, the holy and the mortal 
are let in.132 
Here the Four, the interplay of heaven and earth, the holy and the mortal, is 
Heidegger’s notion of what we have till now called the world. The bridge, as a 
building -thing, is place, which, as such, provides a s pace for the Geviert.  
Expanding upon one of Heidegger’s examples may illustrate the process at work here. 
The interplay of the Four cannot take place without a place that provides a space. But 
the bridge does not magically create an indistinct, homogeneous  space, as if there 
were no difference between Heidelberg’s baroque cobble and sandstone bridge and a 
modern steel and concrete suspension bridge, between a Black Forest hut and a 
Manhattan apartment. The building structures the space it presents by framin g, not 
just spatially; by relating, not just geometrically.  
Joining the shore of hillside estates and contemplative Philosophenweg with the 
shopping district, university, city hall and church, Heidelberg’s historic bridge unites the private and public real ms of its users, just as it originally allowed them to develop 
this division. In crossing the bridge, one is suspended between the eternal flow of the Neckar – wending its way between dams and locks – and the placid sky – rarely torn 
by military jets; bet ween the historic -looking castle and the tourist boats. The bridge 
does not physically encompass town and country, castle and barge, but in providing 
a place for them to converge and appear, it lets them interre late and become what 
they are.  
The sculptura l work, as a place, creates space in which a world can come to be. A 
building approaches this task systematically and designates by its own structure the outlines of the world which can occupy its room. These are two examples out of many 
of things which create space and structure a world within it. A jug is another clear 
case of something which not only defines a place, but in so doing, creates a space: not 
just the volume of its hollow, but the world in which it relates to heaven and earth as 
 
132 Martin Heidegger, “Bauen Wohnen Denken” (1951) in Vorträge und Aufzätze , Bd 
II (Tübingen: Neske, 1954), S. 28f.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  146 
producers of its substance and contents or to the holy and mortal to whom it grants 
offerings and nourishment.  
Heidegger finds the unity of the jug gathered together in its ability to grant the gift of 
its contents. In gathering itself together, the jug gathers togethe r the world, the Four:  
That which is gathered in the gift gathers itself together by appropriatingly letting the Four abide. This manifold simple 
gathering is the jug’s essence. The German lang uage has an old word 
for what gathering is. The word is “thing .” The essence of the jug is 
the pure bestowing gathering of the singular Four in an abiding. The 
jug is essentially present as thing. The jug is the jug as a thing. But 
how is the thing essentially present? The thing things. The thinging 
gathers. it gathe rs, appropriating the Four ( das Geviert ereignend ), the 
Four’s abiding in something momentary: in this or that thing 
(Ding).
133 
To be a jug means to let a world come to be, which then lingers as a unity in the unity 
of the jug. The jug, like a work of art, but in its own way, is creator and preserver of 
a world and is this essentially.  
The phrase, “appropriating the Four,” indicates that appropriating the Four is part of 
the jug’s function as a “thing.” The term “thing” does not refer to everything, but 
only to those things which “thing” in the verbal sense that they gather the Four’s 
abiding in themselves in letting the Four come to abide, in “appropriating” ( ereignen) 
it. Still, this covers a whole host of “things” according to Heidegger, including the jug 
and the bench, gangway and plough, tree and pond, creek and mountain, heron and 
roe, horse and steer, mirror and banner, book and picture, crown and cross.134 The 
last four of these we have already met in their more allegorical expressions.135  
The analysis of the jug led to a notion of thing which, however, is not applicable to 
all things, not even always to jugs. The general term, “thing,” has changed its meaning 
with the historical changes in the meaning of its synonym, “being.” Heidegger’s usage 
is emphat ic, utopian. The jug is not a thing in the Roman sense of res, nor the way the 
Middle Ages conceived of ens, nor even in the modern conception of object. The jug 
is a thing insofar as it  things. From the thinging of the thing the presence of what is 
present in the manner of a jug first appropriates itself and determines itself.136  
 
133 Martin Heidegger, “Das Ding” (1950), ibid., S. 46. 
134 Ibid., S. 55. 
135 Cf. “The origin of the work of art,” op. cit ., S. 50. 
136 Ibid. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  147 
The tendency of our times militates against things being present as thinging things. 
Heidegger’s essay on the  thing is, in fact, introduced by a consideration of our times 
in terms of the collapsing of all distances, the very opposite of the nearing which is 
essential to thinging:  
The fact that the recent increasing elimination of separation has not 
resulted in n earness has brought distancelessness into dominance. 
With the lack of nearness, the thing remains annihilated in the aforesaid sense of thing. But when and how are things as things? We 
ask this in the midst of the domination of distancelessness . . .. What 
becomes thing appropriates itself out of the Ringing ( Gering ) of the 
mirroring -play (Spiegel -Spiels) of the world. Only if, perhaps 
sometime, the world worlds as world, then will the ring shine, which rings around the Ringing of earth and heaven, the holy  and the 
mortal in the ring of their simplicity.
137 
This is the historical factor, which, when introduced into the analysis of the work of 
art, seemed to necessitate a reinter pretation in terms of a Being given independently 
of the work. What determines historically whether the things in an age will be things 
in the Roman, medieval, modern or emphatic sense?  
This determination must, it would seem, be prior to the existence of the thing – in 
whatever sense – and therefore independent of it. Heidegger indicat es that the 
thinging of the thing depends upon the worlding of the world, a worlding of which our world does not seem to partake. This answer, if accepted, pushes the historical 
question further in two directions:  
1. Is the worlding of the world independent of the thinging of the things in it?  
2. What determines historically whether the world worlds or not?  
Technological Being  
Is the worlding of the world independent of the thinging of the thing? Penetrating the 
thickets of Heidegger’s termin ological jungle from  the thing itself to seeming 
tautologies, one returns to the starting point to discover that one has traced a path from the thinging of the thing to the worlding of the world without ever leaving one’s 
seat. Heidegger’s bombardment of terms, distortions of  the already flexible German 
syntax, may not reveal an experiential wealth behind each word in the concise 
 
137 Ibid., S. 54f. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  148 
presentation of the last few minutes of his lecture on the thing, but one can, at least, 
recon struct a link between what he calls thing and world.  
We have already seen that the thing, in being a thing, in thinging, grants a permanence 
to the Four in its unity. “Thinging, the thing abides the unifying four, earth and 
heaven, the holy and the mortal, in the simplicity of its self -unifying Four.”138 This 
unity is a dynamic one, in which each of the four constituents appropriates itself within the unity of the Four. “Earth and heaven, the holy and the mortal belong 
together, unified with each other from themselves and on the basis of the simplicity 
of the u nifying Four. Each of the four in its own way reflects itself appropriately 
within the simplicity of the Four. This mirroring is no presentation of a 
representation. The mirroring appropriates, while clearing each of the four, each’s 
own essence to one another in the simplistic unification.”
139 This mirroring process 
can be taken to be the experiential core of what Heidegger is struggling to communicate – not just on these pages, but in all the descriptions and schemes of 
conceptualizations he has published.  
In the term mirror  one glimpses an unfocused image of Hegel’s speculative thought, 
which once objectified itself with the help of a possibly less metaphorical term, mediation . What the newer jargon is meant to express must be experienced by each 
reader in the models referred  to above: sculpture, the bridge, a jug, the church bells, 
a path through the fields. The play of mirroring, conceived on the grand scale, the 
appropriating mirroring -play of the simplicity of earth and heaven, the holy and the 
mortal, is called the world.
140 
This provides the answer to the question of the dependence of World on thing. The 
worlding of the world is practically nothing but the thinging of the thing disguised in 
different nomenclature. The synonymity is not exact; subtleties provide distinction s. 
The thing is a place which provides Space and provides permanence for the world, 
but it is more than a creative preserver in this sense: it fulfills this formal function, but 
also provides a content and does this precisely by bringing the four of the Fo ur into 
a mutually mirroring play of unity. This play is the world. Trans lating again into 
Hegelian language, the thing is a moment in the dialectical (mirroring) process (play) 
of the world’s self -constitution (worlding).  
The remark which raised the ques tion of the relationship of world and thing was, 
however, somewhat more complex. It refers to the ring and the Ringing: “What the 
thing becomes appropriates itself out of the Ringing of the mirroring -play of the 
world.” The new terms are intro duced in another series of defining pseudo -equations 
 
138 Ibid., S. 50. 
139 Ibid., S. 52. 
140 Ibid. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  149 
in which the processes of objects which are nothing but their processes are given new 
names, to which the same trick is played over and over again!  
The fouring is present ( west) as the appropriating mirroring -play o f 
the simply inter -reliant. The fouring is present as the worlding of 
world. The mirroring -play of world is the propriating dance of 
Appropriation ( Reigen  des Ereignens ). Thus,  the propriating does not 
primarily encircle the Four like a hoop. The propriat ing is the ring 
that rings by playing as the mirror . . .. The collected essence of the 
thus ringing mirroring -play of the world is the Ringing.141 
What was concluded about the relationship of thing to world can be repeated for that 
of world to Ring. Through algebraic cancellation of the middle terms in these 
relationships, we see that the Ring is nothing transcen dentally independent of the 
thing. 
The determination of thing by Ring is misunderstood without its opposite, the 
characterization of the Ring as an  explic ation of the thing. On the one hand, the 
thinging of the thing appropriates itself out of the mirroring -play of the Ring of the 
ringing. On the other hand, the thing lets the Ring abide in something momentary 
from the world’s simplic ity.142 The two poles of the dialectic can be held apart if we 
say that a world finds its place and permanence in a plurality of things, that the 
simplistic isomorphic image must be corrected by a many -to-one relationship of 
things to world. The world in which, for insta nce, the residents of Heidelberg are 
united with their Neckar Valley surround ings, with their heavens and the holy, finds 
its space in many places, its permanence in many things: bridge and alley ways, church 
and houses, castle and university, the sculptures of the gateways and the lyrics ringing 
through the beer halls. The Ring encircles all this in the aura that is old Heidelberg, 
according to the dialectic of whole and part which Hegel once outlined in that city’s 
lecture halls and journals.  
But the re lationship of thing to Ring as its explication is capable of a less dialectical 
interpretation as well. Perhaps Heidegger feels that the Hegelian method of analysis 
distorts by imposing an external scheme. An explication of something that remains 
with the thing itself, with its own immanent categories, can be understood as a 
phenomenological search for essence, a return “to the things themselves.” How does 
one articulate the essence ( Wesen ) of world without concepts heterogeneous to the 
phenomena? Heidegger ’s attempt: “World is present ( west) by worlding. This means, 
the worlding of the world can neither be explained nor founded on the basis of 
 
141 Ibid., S. 53. 
142 Ibid. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  150 
anything else.”143 By articulating the world’s form of presence with the use of the 
verbal form of its name, no new determinations are imposed. Similarly, Heidegger 
chooses the same technique in uncovering the essence of the thing on its own terms. 
He defends this approach as follows: “If we let the thing be present in its thinging out 
of the worlding world, then we thi nk about the thing as the thing . . .. If we think about 
the thing as thing, then we protect the essence of the thing within that region from 
which it is present.”144 
Clearly both tendencies – phenomenological and, where that proves inadequate, 
dialectical – are present throughout Heidegger’s analyses, as any situating of his 
thought in the history of philosophy immediately reveals.145 
Whether and how the two interpretations are compatible is perhaps less urgent for us 
than whether either satisfactorily respon ds to our original problem, the historical 
ontological question. We asked if the worlding of the world was indepen dent of the 
thinging of the thing in the hopes that an affirmative answer would yield a clue to the 
central difficulty: what determines histo rically whether the world worlds or not? The 
doubly negative answer, that neither thing nor world determines the other, that they are inextric ably mutually dependent within the dialectic which they both are, leaves us 
without a clue,  
The paradox is this: on the one hand, a jug is a thing insofar as it things; for a thing 
to thing, the world must world; but the world does not world – that is the problem 
of our times. On the other hand, the presence of what is present – the Being of beings, 
whether a jug is a res, an ens, an object or a thinging thing – is determined, according 
to Heidegger, by the thinging of the thing and the thing in turn by the Ring of the 
mirroring -playing of the world. The historical problematic remains unclarified: what 
deter mines whe n the world will world? To this we can add the question: What is 
special about thinging and worlding as modes of the Being of things and worlds such 
that these modes determine all other modes even when only a different mode is 
present? What model will help  us to unwrap this paradox? Where does Heidegger find 
a hint?  
 
143 Ibid., S. 52. 
144 Ibid., S. 53. 
145 Cf. Zur Sache des Denkens , op. cit., p. 64, S. 70f for Heidegger’s own statement of this.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  151 
Forgetfulness of Being  
The art of church bell ringing provides Heidegger with a striking example of a place 
for the Four to come together and receive a structuring:  
The mysterious unity in whic h the church holidays, the festivals, the 
passing of the seasons and the morning, afternoon and evening 
hours of every day are merged into one another so that always one 
single tone rings through the young hearts, dreams, prayers and games – it is surely t his which conceals itself with one of the most 
magical, holiest and most lasting secrets of the steeple, in order to 
bestow it, ever transformed and unrepeatable, until the last chime in the highlands of Being.
146 
The bells which ring out across the village  before dawn Christmas morning are a 
highly structured, artistically unified combination of the tones which strike the hours 
of the day and ring in the seasonal holidays throughout the year. Each tone has its 
meaning in the rhythm of the community, in the life of man. Tradition has blended 
the various clangs into a harmony which plucks the strings of melancholy in the heart of a man who has been immersed in two world wars since swinging carefree from the 
bell tower ropes as a child. The sounds which once ac companied the experience of 
awe, the play of children, the excitement of Christmas, the burial of victims of war – 
soldiers, friends – the routines of a bygone life, these chimes now bring back into 
existence the life and world which they long ago accentua ted, structured.  
The familiar path through the fields, from hometown  to its neighbor, plays a similar 
role in providing a place for the meeting of man and nature: heaven and earth, the holy and the mortal. Out of the overtones and the over -all tone which the path lends 
to whatever takes place on it, one can read the nature of those constituents of the Four. The path can be made to speak by a kind of reversed dialectic, a reconstruction. 
Returning to town at night, retracing his footsteps of earlier and much  earlier, 
Heidegger hears the church bells and listens to the field path:  
Slowly, almost hesitantly, eleven hour strokes echo in the night. The 
ancient bell, on whose chord the tender hands of choir boys had 
often been rasped, trembles under the poundings of the clapper, 
whose ominous, comical expression none could forget . . .. 
The exhortation of the path through the fields is now quite clear. 
Does the soul speak? Does the world speak? Does God speak? 
 
146 Martin Heidegger, “Vom Geheimnis des Glockenturms” (1956) in Martin Heidegger 
zum 80. Geburtstag  (Frankfurt: Klostermann, 1969) S. 10.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  152 
Everything speaks of the refusal of the sight of one and the same 
thing. The refusal of sight does not take. The refusal of sight gives.147 
The serious thinker of Being and the playful choir boy he once was, the harmony of 
a romanticized farm life and the alienation of technological existence, the holy ringing 
of the bells and the death of God: the contrasts repeat the message of ins ight refused 
over and again. This is the message Heidegger hears everywhere and tries to unravel. The obfuscations of the good life, the just society, the presence of God – all point to 
their determinate negations by concealing them; the only hint of Being  we have is our 
forgetfulness of it, as SuZ points out on its first page. The forgetfulness, expression 
of a refusal, is the very measure of good and evil, of man and world, as He may once 
have been.  
The measure consists in the way the God who remains unkn own is 
manifested by heaven as this unknown. The appearance of God by 
heaven consists in a covering up, which allows to be seen that which conceals itself, but does not allow it to be seen by trying to tear the 
concealed out of its concealment, but only al lows it to be seen by 
protecting the concealed in its self -concealing. Thus shines the 
unknown God as the unknown by the manifestness of heaven. This 
appearance is the standard by which man measures himself.
148 
Leaving for now the things which reveal forgotten, refusing, self -concealing Being, 
we will see in the following chapter how Heidegger attempts to break through the appearances of our times to analyze Being -itself as the refusal which gives us our non -
worlding world. Perhaps the reversal of perspective will help clarify the fundamental 
ambiguity in our Heidegger interpretation. We have, that is, repeatedly seen that 
beings play a role in the creation of Being. At first it seemed as if Being were merely 
a characteristic of beings as they exist and interact with one another, dialectically 
creating their own world. But then Heidegger threw in cryptic remarks pointing to a 
somehow pre -given Being which determines beings and their worlds. The difficulty 
of interp reting these relation ships seemed almost to grow rather than disappear, 
calling for a new approach, a look at the over -all structure of Heidegger’s ontology in 
its most mature expression. 
 
 
147 Martin Heidegger, “Der Feldweg” (1949), ibid., S. 14f. 
148 Martin Heidegger, “Dichterisch Wohnet der Mensch” (1951) in Vorträge und 
Aufzätze , Bd II (Tübingen: Neske, 1954), S. 71.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  153 
Chapter IX: Being- Itself  
The History of Being  
That Heidegger’s is a negative ontology can be seen through out the development of 
his thought and on various levels. His destruction of the history of philosophy and 
his recur rent criticism of prevailing ontological notions represent only the most 
superficial aspects of thi s negativity. Already there between the lines in SuZ, negativity 
is thematized in What  Is Metaphysics?  and repeatedly reflected upon thereafter. The 
central ontological categories in all Heidegger’s writings contain their negation as a 
largely unexpressed,  yet funda mental, correlate: Sinn von Sein and Seinsvergessenheit , 
Unverborgenheit  and Verbergung , Sein and Nichts, Sicht and Versicht , Ereignis  and Enteignis  
(the meaning of being and the forgetfulness of Being, unconcealment and concealing, 
Being and nothingness, sight and refusal of sight, the appropriation and the 
expropriation). The structure of this negative ontology is probably most explicit in 
the minutes to a seminar in which Heidegger openly reflected upon his own path of 
thought, but the comment s there rely upon a famil iarity with his writings. 
SuZ is an attempt at a negative ontology in the sense that it tries to develop an 
ontology under the condition that ontology is today impossible. The experience which 
underlies SuZ’s attempt to work out t he question of the meaning of Being is that of 
the forgetfulness of Being. This oblivion of Being is, however, not conceived as the 
result of laziness or neglect on the part of philosophers,149 but as an essential 
consequence of the nature of Being itself. If God appeared in the Middle Ages in His 
creations, He is now only there in the form of a refusal to be seen; if Being appeared 
to the pre- Socratics in beings, it is concealed to us by them. The sight ( Sicht) which is 
the appropriate access to Being150 is now determined by the Versicht , in which alone 
 
149 The forgetfulness of Being is, however, observable in the situation of academic 
philosophy. The neo -Kantian bracketing of ontology, which led Husserl away from 
Being, and the contemporary reject ion by positivism of what it considers 
metaphysical, resulting in a deep -seated scorn of Heidegger’s work, are perhaps 
extreme examples. Cf. On Time and Being, op. cit ., p. 44, S. 47.  
150 Cf. Being and Time , op. cit ., p. 187, S. 147.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  154 
Being is today present as absent, as in oblivion. Heidegger’s methodology takes this 
circumstance into account from the start.  
Calling the method of his ontology “phenomenology,” he characterizes the phenomena  which he seeks as follows:  
Within the horizon of the Kantian problematic an illustration of what is conceived phenomenologically as a ‘phenomenon’, with 
reservations as to other differences, can be given if we say that that 
which already shows itself in t he appearance as prior to the 
‘phenomenon’ as ordinarily understood and as accompanying it in every case, can, even though it thus shows itself unthematically, be 
brought thematically to show itself; and what thus shows itself in 
itself (‘forms of intuitio n’) are phenomena of phenomenology.
151  
The phenomena of phenomenology ordinarily present themselves by implication 
alone, perhaps concealing themselves in the very act of helping ordinary 
“phenomena” come to thematic appearance. This is a purely formal con cept of 
phenomenon, specifying neither which being – or Being – is referred to, nor the sense 
in which it “always prior and accompanying, but unthematically” shows itself. The 
concept is concretized in various ways in Heidegger’s writings,  and it may be he lpful 
to glance at these before turning to the lecture on Time and Being and the related 
seminar. 
Perhaps the main lesson for ontology in SuZ itself is that Being is not something 
divorced from beings, but rather the structure of their own presence. The wh oleness 
of Dasein , for instance, is sought in a series of structural analyses, which characterize 
its Being- there as Being -in-the-world, care, temporality. Heidegger’s subsequent 
analyses of the work of art, the jug, etc. never leave the beings under analy sis to make 
deductions from a higher being of some kind. The ontological structures are 
existentials, structures of the form of Being of the beings, explications of what was 
always non- thematically inherent.  
‘Behind’ the phenomena of phenomenology there i s essentially 
nothing else; on the other hand, what is to become a phenomenon 
can very well remain concealed . . .. Our investigation itself will show 
that the meaning of phenomenological description as a method lies in explication. The logos of the phenome nology of Dasein  has the 
character of a hermeneuein , through which the authentic meaning of 
 
151 Ibid., p. 187, S. 147.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  155 
Being and the fundamental structures of his own Being are made 
known to Dasein ’s understanding of Being.152 
That this emphasis on explication of the things themselves is still important in 
Heidegger’s later writings was seen in the preceding chapter. After considering 
alternative interpret ations of the essay The Thing, we concluded that the Four, 
mirroring -play, world and appropriation stand in a similar relationship to the thing as 
care, etc. do to Dasein  or world a nd earth, creating and preserving do to the work of 
art, namely as names for moments of its processual Being.153 In each case, it is a matter 
of explicating the form of unconcealment of something which is, particularly in our 
era, concealed.  
Heidegger’s pub lications shortly after SuZ develop themes of negativity only touched 
upon in the context of the Dasein  analysis. On the Essence  of Truth  elaborates the notion 
of ontological truth as unconcealment in its interplay with concealment; this notion 
we have alr eady met in connection with the work of art as the setting -into-work of 
truth. What  Is Metaphysics?  attacks the central problem of unconcealment from another 
angle: reversing SuZ’s perspec tive on the phenomenon of Angst . In the earlier 
presentation, Angst  was important because it revealed the world as world (in the sense 
of world used in SuZ) to Dasein154 by negating his everyday involvement with 
individual beings. The negation, which is non -thematically at work in the revel ation 
of Dasein ’s context of mea nings, is, as such, thematized in What  Is Metaphysics? : 
In Angst  there is a retreat from. . , though it is not so much a flight 
as a spell -bound peace. This retreat from. . , has its source in 
Nothing. The latter does not attract; its nature is to repel. T his 
repelling from itself is as such the relegating reference to the vanish -
ing beings in totality. This relegating reference to the vanishing 
beings in totality, as which Nothingness crowds round Dasein  in 
Angst , is the essence of Nothingness: Nihilation.155 
Nihilation is the precondition for the analysis of world in SuZ. In referring attention 
to the uncomfortable world of Angst  in which all things lose their value for Dasein , 
Nihilation directs attention away from itself. Necessarily accompanying the reve lation 
 
152 Thus, although SuZ’s “fundamental ontology” was more a preliminary analysis 
which had to be repeated later from an entirely different approach, the character of 
phenomenolog ical description remains explication. Ibid., p. 60f, S. 36f. 
153 Cf. e.g., On Ti me and Being , p. 32, S. 34.  
154 Cf. Being and Time , p. 232, S. 187.  
155 Martin Heidegger, “What is metaphysics?” in Existence and Being  (Chicago: Gateway, 
1965), p. 338; Cf. Martin Heidegger, “Was ist Metaphysik?” in Wegmarken  (Frankfurt: 
Klostermann, 1967), S . 11. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  156 
of the world of Angst , Nihilation is itself self -concealing. The two processes, revealing 
and concealing, are really one motion. This is the characteristic finitude of revelation: 
no revealing without concealing, it is a theme of Heidegger’s which r ecurs under many 
titles: Wahrheit  and Irre, Geben and Entzug , Lichtung and Bergung  (truth and error, 
granting and removing, clearing and conceal ing). Nothingness is here still a 
“phenomenon” as defined in SuZ, but it is now explicitly a structure of Being itself, 
of unconcealment, no longer specifically of Dasein . In Heidegger’s mature 
terminology, Nothingness is a giving which gives the revelation of the world as its 
anonymous gift while holding itself back. The lecture, Time and Being, tries to thematize 
the way in which Time and Being are anonymously given in this way, or in which they 
give themselves. This is, of course, the problematic we have already met. In his essay 
on art, Heidegger explored the work o f art as one way in which truth – and that means 
a world, Being, and an historical epoch, Time – is given. Later, he generalized the 
notion of an art work as dynamic unity of world and earth to his utopian conception 
of a thing, which gives itself in the p layful mirroring of the Four. 
The interpretational ambiguities which made Heidegger’s thought so inaccessible or so misunderstood stem largely from the negative form of his ontology, which 
paradoxically yearns to negate to on (the being) instead of classif ying it. Dasein  is not 
really, authentically, that which it primarily and for the most part of necessity is; what 
a thing is, is determined by the worlding of a world which unfortunately does not 
world; and what is all around the earth today has progressiv ely obscured itself for 
more than 2000 years by the way in which everything “is” in a less emphatic sense. During the development of Heidegger’s thought, the negative aspect gains gradually 
in historical sharpness. If SuZ’s explications necessitated the ov ercoming of a rather 
ahistorical inauthenticity, the work of art was already an historical deed, overturning systems of values and revamping the worldviews  of historical folk. Finally, the notion 
of thing embodies a negation of our technological era, repre sented in everything from 
television to atomic bombs. But the increased emphasis on history does not clarify 
Heidegger’s meaning; history and Being merely become inextricably entangled in the 
paradoxes, adding to the confusion.  
The keystone to Heidegger’s paradoxical negative ontology may be seen in the notion 
of the end of the history of Being, a phrase that literally combines negativity, history 
and ontol ogy. The structure of the negative ontology was clearly presented in the 1949 
lecture series, “Glimps e into that which is”: The Thing, The Gestell, The Danger  and The 
Reversal , but is more thoroughly discussed in Time and Being (1962) and the minutes to 
the accompanying seminar. In the earlier lecture series, the utopian conception of the 
thing was first presented; then the nature of technol ogy was analyzed as the Gestell, 
presenting a contrast between the priority of the thing in the worlding of the world and its total subjugation to the subject in the technological context that determines 
our present wo rld. That the thing cannot be what it ideally is, that Being is hidden by 
the technological essence, represents the danger ( Gefahr ) of our times and makes the 
task of thought the return (Kehre ) into Appropriation ( Ereignis ). From the start,  there 
Marx and Heidegger  
  157 
are perpl exing problems to this scheme, already apparent even in so brief a summary: 
What is Appropriation and what can it mean to return into it? If the Gestell is a form 
of Being, how can it be said to hide Being and what right has Heidegger to reject the 
technological form of beings and Being in favor of an “authentic” form, which often 
seems merely romantically utopian? These and similar questions lead us into the 
problematic of the history of Being.  
The lecture, Time and Being, is composed of three sections: an  introduction, a 
presentation of the problem -complex named in the title, and the analysis itself, which 
moves from Being and Time to Appropriation. The introduction hints at the 
underlying problem as well as at methodological considera tions. The task of 
philosophy is, it suggests, conditioned by the contemporary scene, from which it 
receives its necessity both in the sense of motivation and of restriction:  
It might be that this kind of thinking is today placed in a position 
which demands of it reflections that are far removed from any 
useful, practical wisdom. It might be that a kind of thinking has become necessary which must give thought to such matters from 
which even painting and poetry and mathematical physics receive 
their determination. Here too we s hould have to abandon any claim 
to immediate intellig ibility.
156 
The task of thought is still to help live the reflected life, to be wise in the ways of the 
world. But this task cannot be accomplished directly. It requires an analysis of that 
which determines  contemporary appearances – such as Klee’s paintings, Trakl’s verses, 
Heisenberg’s scientific theories – and conceals  itself in them. This is the question of 
Being in an historical and negative formulation. The formulation implies for 
Heidegger that the  analysis must be one of “Being without reference to a grounding 
of Being in beings” and that the lecture which presents this analysis cannot be 
immediately understood as a string of propositions, but only through the mediation 
of the experience of thinkin g about Being.  
The question of Being is historically situated because Being is itself historical. Firstly, 
as Heidegger claims immed iately after the introduction, Being  means presence and is 
thereby related to Time as the unity of the present with the past (presence refused) and the future (presence withheld). Secondly, Being as presence has taken many 
historical forms, as can be seen in the history of philosophy: Plato’s ousia, Aristotle’s 
energia, Kant’s Gegenständlichkeit, Hegel’s Gesetztheit and our technological era’s 
calculable material. Heidegger must therefore explicitly include the historical question, 
whence the unity of all appearances in a given age, with his question of Being. This 
he does in his late lecture by asking not “What is B eing?” but ‘How is Being given?” 
 
156 “Time and Being” in On Time and Being , p.1; “Zeit und Sein” in Zur Sache des Denkens , 
S. 1. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  158 
(Wie gibt es Sein?) The appearances characteristic of our world – mass media, the 
nuclear threat, totalitarianism, subjectivism, the crisis of the cities – share an essential 
rootedness in the contemporary form of Being: pr esence as pliable raw material for 
the uses of people. The question – both historical and ontological – then is: how does 
it come to be that presence is now given in this form? This question forms the starting 
point for the main text of the lecture in term s of the relationship of Time and Being 
– history and presence – and the phrase, “being is given.” 
In SuZ the historical character of the question of being paralleled Husserl’s 
conception of an “archaeology of meaning.”157 To Dasein ’s inauthentic fallenness  in 
the world of objects corresponds his unquestioning acceptance of a tradition, a set of 
prejudices, including the prevailing philosophical tradition with its implicit ontology. 
The amalgam of categories, beliefs and outlooks that have been accumulated i n the 
largely unreflected transmission of wisdom from one generation to the next obscures 
through its own dialectic both its real value and its problematic character:  
The tradition which comes to dominate makes what it ‘transmits’ so 
inaccessible proximall y and for the most part that it tends rather to 
conceal. Tradition takes what has come down to us and makes it commonsensical, blocking our access to those primordial ‘origins’ 
from which the categories and concepts handed down to us have 
been in part quit e genuinely drawn. Indeed, it makes us forget that 
they have had such a source.
158 
The posing of the question of Being was meant to reawaken an awareness of this 
process. The task remaining after the analyses published in SuZ was to remove the 
obscurities, in terms of the question of Being, in the great metaphysical systems of 
Hegel, Kant, Descartes and Aristotle, finally returning to the original experience of 
Being as presence in the pre -Socratic philosophies. According to the plan of SuZ, this 
“destructio n” of the history of ontology was meant to be preceded by a discussion of 
Time and Being which would take off from SuZ’s analysis of Dasein  and temporality. 
This discussion was meant to give a formal answer to the question of Being which 
would then orient concrete textual analyses of the history of ontology, allowing them 
to uncover forgotten potentialities and thereby preparing the way for a new relationship to Being.
159 The answer to the question of Being given in the section 
 
157 Cf. Edmund Husserl, “Der Ursprung der Geometrie” in Die Krisis der europäischen 
Wissenschaften und die Transzendentale Phänomenologie (the Hague: Martinus  Nijhoff, 
1954).  
158 Being and Time , p. 43, S. 21.  
159 This relationship of formal theory to the texts which form the theory’s pre -history 
is not unlike that of Capital ’s first volume (the theory of value and of capitalist 
Marx and Heidegger  
  159 
“Time and Being” was thus envi sioned as neither radically new nor as a final panacea 
for ontology and society.  
Of course, Heidegger never carried out this plan in the original order. After publishing 
SuZ (“Part I”) with its analyses of Dasein  and temporality, he suppressed the section 
on Time and Being, which was to provide the formal answer to the question of Being, 
and for the next 42 years (1927 - 1969) published thousands of pages of historical 
critique before printing the lecture to which we next turn. At the end of our discussion of this lecture, we will have to deal with the consequences of this reversal in 
publication schedule for the formality of Heidegger’s final answer to the question of 
Being. 
Time and Being begins the body of its analysis with the insight into the forgetfuln ess of 
Being in general and the historical process of progressively covering the 
understanding of Being in the thoughtless acceptance of new ontological categories 
at face value, the confusion of mixing incompat ible metaphysical systems and the 
distortion  inherent in translating terms (and the thought they embody) from Greek to 
Latin to German, French and English. Granted that Being is historically given as 
presence – and the lecture’s linguistic motor force is: “ Es gibt Sein” – then, it seems, 
the proces s in which Being is so given ( das Geben) is unknown. Being is an anonymous 
gift that we receive without being aware of the giver or his giving, for we are 
exclusively involved with the presence of beings.
160 That which is sent the way Being 
is sent, without the sender or the sending appearing, is called Geschichte , history, from 
which Heidegger derives his notion of Seinsgeschichte, the history of Being.  
Heidegger introduces his notion as follows:  
The history of Being means destiny of Being in whose sendings both the sending and the It which sends hold back with the announcing 
of themselves. To hold back is, in Greek, epoche. Hence, we speak of 
the epochs of Being... . The epochs cover over each othe r in their 
sequence so that the original sending of Being as presence is more 
and more obscured in different ways. Only the gradual removal of 
these coverings – that is what is meant by the “destruction” – 
procures for thinking a preliminary glimpse into t hat which reveals 
itself as the destiny of Being.
161 
Here themes from SuZ are repeated: the word play with Schicken, Geschick,  Geschichte  
and the “destruction” of the process of covering up. However, the priority has been 
 
production) to its projected fourth v olume (the notes of which form three volumes 
of critique: Theories of Surplus  Value ). 
160 “Time and Being,” p. 9, S. 8.  
161 Ibid., p. 9, S. 9.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  160 
reversed. The historical destructio n now only gives a preliminary glimpse, summarized 
in the final sentence of the excerpt. The real task is to uncover what is still hidden 
even when the various stages of the history of ontology have been explicated and it is 
clear how Plato conceived of Be ing as idea, Aristotle as energia, etc. and it is also clear 
how these are all related forms of presence. Still hidden after the destruction are the giver and the giving, which give Being in its various historical forms of presence.  
We have already taken a  look at one of Heidegger’s attempts to work out the structure 
of the giver and giving in which Being is given. In his lecture on the thing, Heidegger 
described the Being of a thing, a jug, as its “thinging”: “What becomes a thing, 
appropriates itself out of the Ringing of the mirroring -play of the world.” This Being 
is given in the worlding of the world, which in turn was attributed to Appropriation: 
“The mirroring -play of world is the propriating of Appropriation.” Viewed within the 
“Es gibt Sein” formula , the Appropriation is the giver, which gives the jug its Being as 
a thinging thing, and the giving takes place in the mirroring -play of the worlding of 
the unity of heaven and earth, the holy and the mortal. The case of the jug as thing was, however, dist inguished as “utopian” from the normal case in which the jug is an 
object of utility waiting to be fit into someone’s plans.  
Before following Heidegger’s argument from Being and Time to Appropriation (in 
the next section), it will be useful to outline the role Appropriation must play in 
Heidegger’s system. This role is intimately involved with the contrast between the 
contemporary and utopian forms of Being. In fact, the contrast has methodological 
implications for the working out of the structure of Approp riation within the context 
of the history of Being. Although the contrast was foreshadowed in the conceptual 
pair, authentic/inauthentic, in SuZ, the analysis of the work of art provided the 
utopian notion that acted as a catalyst to Heidegger’s progress a fter 1935. The 
importance of this can be seen in Heidegger’s statement that the relations and 
contexts that make up the essential structure of Appropriation were worked out 
between 1936 and 1938.
162 The thirties were certainly a time of crisis in Germany, 
when everyone was searching for alternatives of one kind or another on a world -
historical level and Heidegger was more an extreme example of this than the exception 
he is often taken to be. His concept of the Gestell is a central, but ambiguous, key to 
his approach to this task.  
In the 1956 “Addendum” to his essay on art, Heidegger pointed out the contrast 
between the work of art and technological beings in terms of his concept of the Gestell. 
The essay refers to the Gestell “as which the work is present ins ofar as it erects and 
produces itself.” To this Heidegger comments,  
The word ‘Gestell’ which is later used explicitly as the term for the 
essence of modern technology was used in the essay on art in this 
 
162 Ibid., p. 43, S. 46.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  161 
sense (not in its common meanings of bookcase , montage, etc.). This 
connection is essential because it is part of the history of Being . . .. 
On the one hand we must avoid the specifically modern 
connotations of thesis or positing ( Stellen)  and montage ( Gestell) in 
Fest-stellen  and Ge-stell in The Origin  of the Work  of Art. On the other 
hand, we must not overlook the fact that and the degree to which 
the Being which determines the modern age comes as Ge-stell out of 
the Western destiny.163 
There is a certain ambiguity to Heidegger’s use of the term Gestell: it can refer either 
to the utopian worlding of the world in a work of art or also to the essence of modern 
technology. This ambiguity is not a matter of conceptual sloppi ness or coincid ence, 
but is supposedly the result of an essen tial relationship within the history of Being. In 
commenting on the introductory remarks to Time and Being, Heidegger states that the 
Gestell, as the preliminary appearance ( Vorerscheinung ) of the Appropriation, is also that 
which necessitates the attempt to bring into view that which is around the earth 
today.164 The Gestell involves the glimpse that phenomena like the work of art give us 
of Appropriation, which sends the forms of Being, and it involves the lat est form of 
Being, which we have been given in the modern techno logical age and which 
represents the danger of our times.165 
The Gestell as the essence of technology is simply the latest, most extremely 
subjectivistic form of Being. However, in the work of  art the Gestell is part of the 
worlding of the world; a stage in the process in which Appropriation sends Being, and not merely that which is sent. In this latter sense, the analysis of the Gestell represents 
a move beyond that which is revealed in the hi story of Being and towards an 
uncovering of the giving and the giver , which normally conceal themselves. The 
transformation of Being into Appropriation thus steps outside of the epochal 
transformations of Being, from which it must be distinguished.
166 This stepping 
outside, which Heidegger refers to as the reversal ( Kehre ) or the step back ( schritt  
zurück), constitutes the leaving behind of metaphysics.  
In turning away from Being as the Being of beings, Heidegger leaves the metaphysical tradition which still  influenced the original plans for its own destruction in SuZ, and 
tries to think about Being in terms of Appropriation or “Being -itself,” which gives 
Being. Heidegger’s notion of Being as Appropriation is thus qualitatively different 
from all the previous  notions of Being as idea, energia, etc. The analysis of Being as sent 
 
163 Later edition of “Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes,” op. cit ., S. 72, S. 97f.  
164 “Time and Being,” p. 33, S. 35.  
165 Ibid., p. 53, S. 57.  
166 Ibid., p. 52f, S. 56.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  162 
demands a consideration of the sending in which all the previous notions of Being 
have been sent, it could be called a meta -ontology, a reflection upon the preconditions 
of all systems of metaphysics. The Olympian position Heidegger attains in his meta -
ontology secures him from the charge of relativism; in explaining the multitudes of 
ontologies, he need not compete on their level.  
Heidegger defends his system with a familiar tactic. Heg el’s idealistic theory was the 
final word because it incorporated the end of the history of the concept. Marx’s materialism founded the objectivity of its class analysis in its perspec tive from the 
potential end of the history of class domination. Analogo usly, the thinging of the 
thing is not utopian in the sense of wildly romantic wishing, but, as part of 
Appropriation, is founded in the end of the history of Being and is thus meta -levels 
beyond technological beings with their positivistic fundamentum  in re rather than in the 
giving of the meaning of res. 
Heidegger’s end of history is, formally at least, more like Marx’s than Hegel’s. Where the conservative idealist thought that progress had already reached its goal, his 
materialist critic viewed the end of the previous form of history (unplanned 
“prehistory”) as the occasion for a qualitatively different form: truly human progress 
based on a conscious response to concrete needs. The Heideggerian step into 
Appropriation is not viewed as a stopping of the se nding of Being in new forms, but 
as a dawning awareness of the process of this sending, an end to the forgetfulness of 
Being and thus to metaphysics as the reflection of this forgetfulness in philosophy.
167 
While people as mortals remain limited in their re lation to Being even when thought 
has experienced the Appropriation – and this notion of human finitude is perhaps the 
crux of Heidegger’s rejection of Marx – Heidegger does retain an optimism that the 
danger which has been growing since Plato can be abate d by ending the self -
concealing of Appropriation  
Meta -ontology 
We have seen that the Appropriation is that which gives Being in various historical 
forms and which conceals itself and its giving in the gift of Being. The task of thought 
today is thus, according to Heidegger, to “step back” from the view of Being in ter ms 
of the beings which it lets be and to turn to the process in which Being is itself given, 
to experience Appropriation. Keeping this in mind, we can understand Heidegger’s 
presentation of Appropriation in Time and Being. The underlying experience of 
negative ontology is Versicht,  Vergessenheit,  Verbergung . Concealing takes place at every 
 
167 Ibid., p. 50, S. 53f.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  163 
stage of Heidegger’s argument: Being is sent to us, but the giving keeps to itself. Time 
is passed to us, but the present is withheld from us in the future and refused us  in the 
past.168 
The point of the step back is to reveal these self -concealing phenomena by 
understanding them in their self -concealing. The stepping is thus ambiguous, 
involving a movement  into the underlying phenomena (in the phenomenological sense 
part o f a stepping  back to let them reveal themselves). The second tendency seems to 
gain in priority in Heidegger’s later writings, contributing to their mystical tone 
because of its passive receptivity and consequent incommunicability.  
To make intersubjective sense out of this two -pronged approach to the analysis of 
Appropriation – the retreat from metaphysics to step back into underlying 
Appropriation, to let it show itself as itself free from our metaphysical language – we 
are forced to stress the moment of p henomenological explication ( Auslegung ). The 
other moment, letting appropriation show itself freely, we can only understand in terms of Heidegger’s frequently repeated warning not to understand the phrases “It 
gives Being” and “It gives Time” as propositio ns with subject, verb and object, but 
rather to understand them on the basis of that which is given – Being and Time – and 
how it is given – sending and passing.  
Time and Being begins its struggle with the related problems of the relationship of Time 
and Being – history and presence – and the way in which Being is given in terms of 
Being as presence. The determination of Being as presence, assumed valid for all 
epochs in the his tory of Being, can be taken as a result of Heidegger’s historical studies 
elsewhere or – like the determination of Dasein ’s Being as Existence in SuZ – as a leap 
into a hermeneutic circle, not to be deduced in advance, but to be justified in the end. 
It could also be treated as a synthesis of these two alternatives, on the model of Marx’s 
unity of research and presentation.  
The giving in which Being is given is then determined in accordance with Being as 
presence:  
Being, by which all beings are marked as su ch, Being means being 
present. Considered with regard to what is present, being present 
shows itself as letting -be-present. But now we must try to consider 
this letting -be-present explicitly insofar as being present is allowed. 
Letting- be-present shows its  own- most character in bringing into 
unconcealment. To let be present means to unconceal, to bring into openness. In unconcealing, a giving is at play, that namely which in 
letting- be-present gives the being present, i.e., gives Being.
169 
 
168 Ibid., p. 22, S. 23.  
169 Ibid., p. 5, S. 5.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  164 
Metaphysically con sidered, Being as presence characterizes every being as a presence 
by letting it be present. Heidegger’s question reverses this perspective on Being and 
asks how this Being is given so that it can in turn give beings as present. Metaphysically, 
that is, Being as presence is a letting -be-present  (Anwesen -lassen) of presences, whereas 
Heidegger is interested in the way in which Being is allowed- to-be-present (Anwesen -
lassen ). 
Heidegger has answered this question in various vocabularies,  and it may be helpful 
to relate in chart form the terminol ogies of 1) SuZ, 2) The Thing and 3) Time and Being: 
1 beings  Being Time Being- itself 
2 thing world  mirroring -play Appropriation  
3 the present being  letting -be-present  letting- be-present  Appropriation  
 
The vertical dimension indicates the path of negative ontology from categories of the 
existant to their utopian form of Being and then to a consideration of the relationship 
of the two forms in terms of the history of Being and its end. The horizontal 
dimension indicates the two possible directions for an analysis of Being or of letting -
be-present: metaphysically to the left or ontologically moving to the right into 
Appropriation. That a chart cannot faithfully reproduce years of subtle thought or 
thousands of pages of complex writing need scarcely be stated. Further, the terms 
which Heidegger uses are inadequate to his task, being part of a metaphysically biased traditional language, and must be understood as “ontic models” which give a hint of 
something langua ge is incapable of expressing properly.
170 The chart does, however, 
suggest a relationship between what SuZ called Time and what Time and Being refers 
to as the giving of Being, a relationship which warrants exploration.  
The terms Time and Being are only th e starting point for Time and Being,  meant to 
provide a continuity with SuZ. In Time and Being, Being is re-conceptualized as 
presence, which is given in a sending as that which is sent in the epochal changes of 
presence. Presence has a temporal character and so Heidegger investigates Time and 
the giving of Time to see if it is Time which gives Being, as suggested at SuZ’s close. 
Time is given in the clearing passing of the Time -space in which presence is withheld, 
given or refused. Thus,  Time is the giver of Being (or, correspondingly, the withholder 
or refuser of Being). But what then gives Time? The giv er of Being was not found to 
be Time by some sort of deduction from the phrase “It gives Time,” but by uncovering what lay hidden in the characterization of Being as sent presence. 
 
170 Cf. ibid., p. 55f, S. 54f. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  165 
Similarly, the giver of Time is to be uncovered in the characterization of Time as 
clearing passing.171 
The phrases “sent presence” and “clearing passing” indicate a circle of activity. The 
sending of the presence of temporal beings takes place as the passing of the 
dimensions of Time. Insofar as one can even distinguish Being and Time anymore , 
they appear together within a mirroring play. In the interplay of Time and Being, they 
are given as clearing passing and sent presence. Time, as clearing passing, thus shows 
itself to be given in the playful unity of Being and Time.  This unity, in which Being 
and Time appropriate what is appropriate to them, is called by Heidegger Ereignis , the 
event of appropriation.172 
Just as we concluded earlier in reference to The Thing that Appropriation was not 
something totally separable from the Ring, the Four, the mirroring -play of the world 
or the thinging of the thing, but that these various abstractions represented a series of 
successive explications of a single phenomenon, so too in Time and Being 
Appropriation is not a distinct third party to the pair, Being and Time. Rathe r, Being 
as Anwesen -lassen (presence) reveals itself as Time in the sense of Anwesen -lassen  
(clearing) and the relationship of these two aspects of the same phenomenon is Appropriation, which can be pictured as a non -temporal process of mutual self -
approp riation. What smacks of Hegelian mediation cannot strictly speaking be called 
dialectical, because Being, Time and the event of appropriation are no longer posited as distinct entities which merely presuppose each other. At most they could be 
considered d istinguishable moments of the process in which beings come to be 
present. In this sense they are not, however, chronologically distinguishable, but concept ual moments in the phenomenological explication of that which “gives” 
presence (and chronology itsel f) in its historical modes.  
The subtlety of the distinction between Being and Appropria tion is captured in 
Heidegger’s statement of purpose: bringing into view Being -itself as Appropriation.
173 
Throughout Heidegger’s writings, the phrase “Being -itself” has  been carefully, if not 
always clearly, distinguished from “Being” and has always referred to what is now 
called Appropriation.174 However, the separation of Being as presence from Being -
itself as the Appropriation which gives Being is problematized by the use of one word 
for two functions. Heidegger must have judged it important enough to show the unity 
of the phenomenon that he used the term “Being” in this plurality of senses, despite 
 
171 Ibid., p. 18f, S. 19f. 
172 Ibid., p. 19, S. 20.  
173 Ibid., p. 23, S. 24.  
174 Cf. ibid., p. 43, S. 46.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  166 
the confusion which thereby resulted ( e.g., in discussions of the ontol ogical 
difference).  
In The Thing the unity of the ontological phenomenon was expressed in the repetitive 
phrase, “the world worlds.” Although he could not say, “Being is,” the term “ Ereignis ” 
allows Heidegger to repeat this ploy:  
World is present insofar a s it worlds. That is, the worlding of world 
is neither explainable in terms of others nor can it be ground in 
others.175 
What is left to say? Only this:  Appropriation approp riates. With 
this, we say the same from the same to the same.176 
But this is the for mulation of an ontology of identity, not one seeking an escape from 
the contemporary form of presence, the danger of our times. Technological objects do not “thing” because this world does not “world,” because Appropriation does not 
“appropriate.” In the s ending of Being and the passing of Time, Appropriation 
retreats and withholds or refuses itself: Appropriation expropriates itself (enteignet ).
177 
Negative ontology is one of finitude. In SuZ, Dasein’s finitude is expressed in the 
limitation of his possibil ities to be, imposed by his birth, situation and death, and by 
his limited understanding of these possibilities as his own. The finitude of being is 
manifold: presence is always given in one form and thereby not in others (although at 
any moment there may be an overlapping of epochs as seen in the contemporaneity 
of van Gogh’s painting with the shoes it pictures, or individual phenomena may be subject to a plurality of interpretations, e.g. by a philosopher, an art critic and a 
museum custodian). Time invol ves the absence of presence withheld or refused. 
Appropriation keeps to itself in the sending of Being and the passing of Time. Appropriation reveals itself only negative ly, as Expropriation, in its absence from the 
sending of Being and the passing of Tim e, as the forgotten question of Being, as the 
danger of our times and as the task for critical thought.  
The Concept of Being  
In the preceding,  we have tried to sketch -in a coherent, more or less intelligible  system 
of thought as an interp retation of Heidegger’s central writings, of the path and thrust 
 
175 “The Thing,” S. 52.  
176 “Time and Being,” p. 24, S. 24.  
177 Ibid., p. 22, S. 23.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  167 
of his thinking about Being. We have tried to understand his negative ontology – an 
attempt to grasp the way in which beings are given as present without thereby setting 
contemporary Being as an absolute – from the perspective of our historical 
ontological question: how it comes to be that a certain sense of Being prevails in a 
given era. Assuming that what Heidegger has said is valid and that we have understood  
him correctly, and granting that he has presented a wealth of material which we have ignored, we can now pose the question: Has Heidegger in the end offered us anything 
substantial under his cloud of analyses?  
Heidegger’s path of thought has led him to cr iticize the entire philosophical tradition 
from the pre -Socratics to Husserl, as a whole and in particulars. He has also proposed 
powerful, original perspectives for answering the eternal philosophical questions 
concerning space, time and Being; art, scien ce and the humanities; knowledge, truth 
and thought; things, tools, works and mortals; history, freedom and death. Yet, in the end the question forces itself upon us, as upon Heidegger himself: “But do we arrive 
by this road at anything other than to a mer e mental construct?”
178 Is Heidegger’s 
thought so deep that it bypasses all content, so abstract that it has no concrete significance, so essential that it forgets its original inspiration: that essence lies in the 
particular existence? We have seen that or iginally (in SuZ) the abstractness of the 
answer to the question of Being was to be counteracted by the concrete destruction 
of the history of ontology. In Time and Being, these concrete analyses have already been 
incorporated into the discussion – to little avail. The seminar to Time and Being touched 
upon the problems of non -specificity several times.  
In the seminar, Heidegger was asked if it was sufficient to grasp the relation of 
presence to what is present as uncover ing ( Entbergen ) when this term is taken in 
abstraction from all content: “If unconcealing already lies in all kinds of poiesis, of 
making, of effecting, how can one exclude these modes and keep unconcealing purely for itself?”
179 To this question, Heidegger responded that unconcealing ( Entbe rgen) in 
the sense he used it was in fact more general than e.g. Plato’s usage of poiesis because 
he referred to the uncovering of the whole being as such, not e.g. just to its eidos, what 
it is as distinct from that it is. He had to admit, however, that i t remained a task of 
thought to determine the uncoveredness of the different realms of things.180 
The concept of presence presents the same problem. Heidegger finds it in all the 
metaphysical conceptions of Being; if his lecture ever seemed to proceed deduc tively, 
it was from the characterization of Being in all its forms as presence, with its temporal connotation. Yet, Heidegger must admit, the first principle of Being as presence is 
totally questionable: “The priority of presence thus remains an assertion in the lecture 
 
178 Ibid., p. 23, S. 24.  
179 Ibid., p. 46f, S. 50.  
180 Ibid., p. 47, S. 50f.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  168 
Time and Being, but as such a question  and a task of thinking, namely to consider whether 
and whence and to what extent the priority of presence exists.”181 These terms, 
uncovering and presence, are no exceptions among Heidegger’s tangle of c oncepts. 
Leaving the dirty work for one’s followers is not simply a lazy man’s trick; it is 
questionable whether the generality of a concept is an asset, especially if it is not 
supported by a pyramid of more specific concepts applicable to the various asp ects 
as well as the different regions. Heidegger’s specific analyses of Angst , the work of art 
or the jug may have been brilliant in their day, or they may have been trite and absurd 
– they were not meant to be judged on their own. Whatever their value, th ey could 
never justify by themselves the generalizing leaps that followed in their wakes; such 
generalizations may in the end be unjustifiable or lead to mere emptiness.  
The emptiness of Heidegger’s generality is perhaps most painful in connection with 
his attempt at social criticism. In contrast to the insightful and subtle handling of 
complex and abstruse considerations throughout the seminar, the blatantly naive question about how the technological sense of Being is limited to our planet was 
ignored. “It was not explained how the Gestell, which constitutes the essence of 
modern technology, hence of something that, as far as we know, only occurs on earth, 
can be a name for universal Being.”
182 A confusion about the scope of the problem 
might not be so disas trous if Heidegger were clearer about the nature of the salvation 
from the technological danger. Alas, here he is not even sure what he does not know. 
He remains unshaken in his confidence that he can reach salvation by stepping ever 
backwards into increas ing abstraction, but where, what or how salvation will be 
reached he cannot imagine.  
To the extent to which this was clarified, one could say in spite of 
the inadequacy of these expressions: The ‘that’ of the place of the 
‘whither’ is certain, but as yet how this place is, is concealed from 
knowledge. And it must remain undecided whether the ‘how ,’ the 
manner of Being of this place, is already determined (but not yet 
knowable) or whether it itself results only from the taking of the step, 
in the awakening into Appropriation.183 
Not that Heidegger has to have all the answers, but his poverty at the crucial point 
raises further questions. How does he know that what he is searching for is to be 
found if he knows nothing about it? Is this merely wishful thinking done up in fancy 
jargon? If the general concepts remain questions and the concrete groundwork  has 
 
181 Ibid., p. 34, S. 37.  
182 Ibid., p. 33, S. 35.  
183 Ibid., p. 30f, S. 33.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  169 
yet to be carried out, does Heidegger really have more to offer, even in the form of 
an ontological foundation, than Marx?  
 
Marx and Heidegger  
  170 
Concluding Remarks 
Both Marx and Heidegger formulate theories of technological Being, expressed in the 
related conceptions of abstract value and calculable stock. For each of the thinkers, 
the theory of technological society is elaborated within an historical meta -ontology, 
which attempts to compre hend the contemporary form of Being as having developed 
out of Western civilization and to criticize it as limited, contradictory and self -
concealing. But, whereas man, beings and Being -itself are treated by Heidegger as if 
they were monads with windows to  each other but no developed relations, Marx 
grasps them precisely by their mediations. Heidegger, claiming to inquire after the 
conditions of the possibility of their having relations to each other, hypostatizes even 
Being – which is no being, but a momen t in the mediation of beings – into an in- itself 
with essential characteristics, possibilities and temporality. Marx, in contrast, understands people and their products as determining the totality of interrelations, 
which in turn determines them, a totalit y which is most appropriately conceptualized 
by a theory of the mode of production as the primary sphere of mediation. The term 
“Being” is unnecessary to Marx’s theory for it is implicitly dealt with, rather than being 
fixated upon and glorified. 
For Heide gger, as for Hegel before him, the develop mental process whereby Being, which determines 
the form of presence of beings, is itself determined takes place solely within the realm of Being -itself. 
In Marx’s theory, on the contrary, the history of Being is t he consequence of concrete human history , 
and its apparent autonomy from human control is an illusion resulting from the 
complexity of historical mediations within an antagonistically structured society. 
Marx’s ontological essences, above all that of abstr act value, are accordingly derived 
from concrete, historically specific  categories, such as exchange value, comprehended 
as the form of appearance of the essence. Actual beings are thus not simply 
objectifications or placeholders of a Being that develops i ndependently; the history of 
Being is not a mystical intergalactic happening or even a process taking place primarily within the language of a people or the intellectual history of a tradition. That beings are 
now present as calculable stock, abstracted fr om their unique context and physical characteristics, is, 
according to Marx, primarily a result of their being present in relations of exchange. It is these concrete 
relations of beings to beings as they have developed in social, economic, material history , which equate 
the forces used in the production of each commodity with all other forces of production, equate each being with every other commodity, equate the human activity involved in any task with labor as such , 
and thereby abstract from the mortality  and situatedness of people.  
Marx thus understands the prevailing form of presence in relation to the social totality, 
whose character is essentially conditioned by the prevalent mode of production. For 
Marx, history progresses through a dialectic of whole  and part, of social production 
and its various products. Heidegger, however, investigating the preconditions of this 
Marx and Heidegger  
  171 
process, loses sight of the dialectical relation ship in favor of a one -sided determination 
by Being of the form of presence of beings. Wh ere Marx understands the 
preconditions of one epoch as the conditions of its predecessor, Heidegger accepts 
the character of an epoch as fatefully given and beyond comprehension. The triviality 
of Heidegger’s social commentary in comparison to Marxian soci al analysis is thus neither accidental 
nor is it to be enriched through the addition of concrete details. Being, which determines beings as 
beings, must itself be shown to be conditioned by beings.  The ontological self -interpretation of 
the world is not di vorced from the ontic self -transformation of the world; thought 
which attempts to comprehend the former cannot ignore its unity with the latter, as 
Heidegger does.  
 
Marx and Heidegger  
  172 
Bibliography  
Adorno, Theodor W. The Jargon of Authenticity . Evanston: Northwestern Universi ty 
Press. 1973.  
Adorno, Theodor W. Letter to Walter Benjamin dated 10 November 1938. New Left 
Review. No. 81. October 1973.  
Adorno, Theodor W. Negative  Dialectics . New York: Seabury. 1973.  
Adorno, Theodor W. A portrait of Walter Benjamin. Prisms. London: Neville 
Spearman. 1967.  
Adorno, Theodor W. Thesen über die Sprache des Philosophen. Gesammelte  Schriften 
I. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 1973.  
Adorno, Theodor W. Der wunderliche Realist: Über Siegfried Kracauer. Noten  zur 
Literatur  VI. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 1965.  
Apel, Karl -Otto. Transformation  der Philosophie . 2 vols. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 1973.  
Benjamin, Walter. Illuminations . New York: Schocken. 1969.  
Continuum . Vol. 8. Nos. 1 & 2. Chicago. 1970.  
Enzensberger, Hans -Magnum. Critique of political ecology. New Left Review. No. 84.  
Gadamer, Hans- Georg. Wahrheit  und Methode:  Grundzüge einer philosophischen 
Hermeneutik . 2nd. ed. Tübingen: Mohr. 1965.  
Habermas, Jürgen. Knowledge  and Human  Interests. Boston: Beacon Press. 1971.  
Habermas, Jürgen. Zur Logik der Sozialwissenschaften. Philosophische  Rundschau . 
Beiheft 5. Tübingen. February 1967.  
Heidegger, Martin. Bauen Wohnen Denken. Vorträge  und Aufsätze. Bd. II. Tübingen: 
Neske, 1954.  
Heidegger, Martin. Dichterisch Wohnet der Mens ch. Vorträge  und Aufsätze. Bd. II. 
Tübingen: Neske. 1954.  
Heidegger, Martin. Das Ding. Vorträge  und Aufsätze. Bd. II. Tübingen: Neske. 1954.  
Heidegger, Martin. Einfuhrung  in die Metaphysik . Tübingen: Neske. 1958.  
Heidegger, Martin. An Introduction  to Metap hysics. Garden City: Anchor. 1961.  
Heidegger, Martin. Das Ende der Philosophie und die Aufgabe des Denkens. Zur 
Sache  des Denkens . Tübingen: Niemeyer . 1969. 
Heidegger, Martin. The end of philosophy and the task of thinking. On Time and 
Being. New York: Harper & Row. 1972.  
Heidegger, Martin. Der Feldweg. Martin  Heidegger  zum 80. Geburtstag. Frankfurt: 
Klostermann. 1969.  
Heidegger, Martin. Hegel und die Griechen . Wegmarken . Frankfurt: Klostermann. 
1967.  
Heidegger, Martin. Humanismusbrief. Wegmarken . Frankfurt: Klostermann. 1967.  
Heidegger, Martin. Letter on humanism. Philosophy in the Twentieth  Century . Vol. III. 
New York: Harper & Row. 1971. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  173 
Heidegger, Martin. K ants These über das Sein. Wegmarken . Frankfurt: Klostermann. 
1967.  
Heidegger, Martin. Nietzsche . Bd. II. Pfüllingen: Neske. 1961.  
Heidegger, Martin. The Question  of Being. Bilingual ed. New Haven: College & 
University Press. 1958.  
Heidegger, Martin. Raum und Kunst . St. Galen: Erker Verlag. 1969.  
Heidegger, Martin. Der Satz von Grund . Pfüllingen: Neske. 1971.  
Heidegger, Martin. Sein unt Zeit. Tübingen: Niemeyer. 1967.  
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. New York: Harper& Row. 1962.  
Heidegger, Martin. Der Ursprung des Kunstwerkes. Holzwege . Frankfurt: 
Klostermann. 1963.  
Heidegger, Martin. The origin of the work of art. Philosophies  of Art and Beauty . New 
York: Modern Library. 1964.  
Heidegger, Martin. Der Ursprung  des Kunstwerkes . Stuttg art: Reclam. 1960.  
Heidegger, Martin. Vom Geheimnis des Glockenturms. Martin  Heidegger  zum 80. 
Geburtstag. Frankfurt: Klostermann. 1969.  
Heidegger, Martin. Was Heisst  Denken?  Tübingen: Niemeyer. 1971.  
Heidegger, Martin. What  is Called  Thinking? New York: H arper & Row. 1968. 
Heidegger, Martin. Was ist Metaphysik? Wegmarken . Frankfurt: Klostermann. 1967.  
Heidegger, Martin. What is metaphysics? Existence  and Being. Chicago: Gateway. 
1965.  
Heidegger, Martin. What  is Philosophy?  Bilingual ed. New Haven: College & 
University Press. n.t. 
Heidegger, Martin. Zeit und Sein. Zur Sache  des Denkens . Tübingen: Niemeyer. 1969.  
Heidegger, Martin. Time and Being. On Time and  Being. New York: Harper & Row. 
1972.  
Hermeneutik  und Ideologiekriti k. Frankfurt: Suhrkamp. 1971.  
Horkheimer, Max & Adorno, Theodor W. Dialectic of Enlightenment . New York: 
Herder & Herder. 1972.  
Husserl, Edmund. Der Ursprung der Geometrie. Die Krisis  der europäischen  
Wissenschaften  und die transzendentale  Phänomenologie . The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
1954.  
Jünger, Ernst. Der Arbeiter: Herrschaft  und Gestalt. Hamburg. 1932.  
Lukacs, Georg. Geschichte  und Klassenbewusstsein . Berlin: Malik. 1967.  
Marcuse, Herbert. One-Dimensional  Man. Boston: Beacon. 1964.  
Marcuse, Herbert. The affirmative character of culture. Negations . Boston: Beacon. 
1969.  
Martin  Heidegger  im Gespräch . Freiburg: Alber. 1969.  
Marx, Karl. A  Contribution  to the Critique  of Political  Economy . New York: International. 
1970.  
Marx, Karl. Einleitung. Grundrisse der Kritik  der politischen  Ökonomie  (Rohentwurf) 1857-
1858. Photocopy of 1939. Moscow editions. Frankfurt: Europische 
Verlagsanstalt. 1941.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  174 
Marx, Karl. Introduction. Grundrisse. London: Penguin. 1973.  
Marx, Karl. Pre- Capitalist Economic  Formations . New York: International Publishers. 
1969.  
Marx, Karl. Das  Kapital , Bd. I. Frankfurt: Ullstein. 1971.  
Marx, Karl. Capital . Vol. I. New York: International. 1967.  
Marx, Karl. Ökonomisch -Philosophische Manuskripten (1844). Texte zu Methode  und 
Praxis . Bd. II. Reinbek: Rowohlt. 1966.  
Marx, Karl. Economic and philosophic manuscripts (1844). Writings  of the Young  
Marx  on Philosophy and Society. Garden City: Doubleday, 1967.  
Petrovik, Gajo. Der Spruch des Heideggers. Durchblicke. Marti n Heidegger  zum 80. 
Geburtstag. Frankfurt: Klostermann. 1970. S. 412ff.  
Pöggeler, Otto. Philosophie  und Politik  bei Heidegger . Freiburg: Alber. 1972.  
Schwann, Alexander. Politische  Philosophie  im Denken  Heideggers . Koln: Westdeutscher. 
1965.  
Schmidt, Alfred. Marx’s  Concept  of Nature . London: New Left Books. 1972.  
Schmidt, Alfred. Geschichte  und Struktur. Munchen: Hauser. 1971.  
 
Marx and Heidegger  
  175 
Vita                    .      
Marx and Heidegger  
  176 
 
1945 Born at the dawn of advanced industrial capitalism on March 16 near 
Wilmington, Delaware, into a family committed to trade unionism 
and socialist liberalism.  
1963- 67 At M.I.T., discovered limitations of the modern scientistic 
perspective and sought acceptable critical alternatives. Introduced to 
phenomenology and existentialism. Award ed S.B. in philosophy and 
mathematics. Received political education in the New Left.  
1967- 68 Explored Europe and continental thought while honeymooning in 
romantic Heidelberg. Concentrated on Gadamer’s hermeneutics and 
Heidegger’s ontology.  
 
1968- 70 Taught high school, drove a cab, did computer systems programming, helped raise a son. Took several philosophy courses 
at Temple U.  
1970- 71 During graduate study at Northwestern U., organized study groups 
on Marx, hermeneutics and Habermas, translating some of the texts. 
Was granted M.A. and permitted to undertake research into the 
meeting -grounds of Marxism and existentialism.  
1971- 73 Attended University of Frankfurt/Main, studying Hegel, Marx, Adorno, Habermas. Followed discussion within remnants of the 
Institut für Socialforschung . Wrote dissertation chapters on Heidegger.  

Marx and Heidegger  
  177 
1973- 74 Taught courses on Marx, Wittgenstein, Heidegger, Adorn o at 
Evening Division of Northwestern U. Organized study groups on 
Frankfurt School. Developed key aspects of the Marx interpretation; 
composed and clarified bulk of the dissertation.  
1974- 75 Returned to computer work and joined the organizing drive for an  
AFSCME union local. Experimented in electronic music 
composition, suburban living and political discourse. Analyzed 
opening dialectic of Das Kapital  and formulated dissertation’s 
prefatory, transitional and concluding remarks. Declared dissertation comple te on thirtieth birthday and defended it May 8. Published 
chapter on Adorno’s Heidegger critique in Boundary  II, a journal of 
postmodern literature.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  178 
Marx and Heidegger  
  179 
EPILOGUE: THE WORKING OF 
SONIC BEING IN E -MUSIC  
Martin Heidegger’s exploration of how things are disclosed (his ontology , or 
philosophy of being) provides innovative ways of understanding many phenomena, 
including works of art. Although Heidegger did not write about music, he did discuss 
the working of other art forms , including painting, pottery and sculpture. To discuss 
the implications of Heidegger’s philosophy for understanding the nature of music, we 
can consider his analyses of these different art forms  and adapt them to music . This 
chapter will extend Heidegger’s approach to art by applying it t o the development of 
electronic music in the mid -twentieth century to elucidate both his philosophy and 
that intriguing movement in music.  
Heidegger is concerned with the way things come into being, their forms of being, or 
how their being is worked out. The being of something centrally involves how it 
present s or disclose s itself  in its specific form of appearance. This chapter will explore 
the being of works of a certain genre of music, e-music—that is, how works of 
electronic music  are structured to  disclose worlds of sound in certain  ways.  
 The term “e-music” is here  coined to refer to a spirit of electronic music as it 
developed in the 1950s and 1960s  (Dunn, 1992; Eimert, 1957) . E-music grew out of 
the serial music of Schoenberg and other s, and featured composers such as Varese, 
Stockhausen, Boulez and Xenakis. It had broad influences on classical, jazz, fusion , 
acid rock, rap, new -age trance and disco -dance music. Integral to e -music’s 
compositional experimentation was the concomitant dev elopment of analog and 
digital technologies of sound production, including tape splicing, sound sampling, 
sequencers and synthesizers. We will consider e -music specifically as exemplified by 
paradigmatic works and reflections of Karl- Heinz Stockhausen (1962; 1972) , which 
defined an approach to composition with striking parallels to Heidegger’s philosophy.  
We will  view the being of works of e -music from the perspective s of four identifiable 
approaches by Heidegger to analyzing how works of art and other beings are 
disclosed:  
(a) Available b eings like tools are disclosed as understood  within the nexus of beings 
that form one’s world as one pursues human concerns. (Heidegger, 1927/1996)  
(b) Works of art like paintings disclose by setting truth into work —i.e., disclosing a 
world created by the working of the artwork. (Heidegger, 1935/1964)  
(c) Things like hand -crafted jugs are disclosed in accordance with the ir historic epoch 
of being, such as the antique, medieval, mechanical or digital  era. (Heidegger, 
1962/1972) 
Marx and Heidegger  
  180 
(d) Works like sculpture disclose relations of  form, space and time —thereb y creating 
material, moments and places for people to dwell . (Heidegger, 1969/1973)  
We will explore how to  apply  each of these four ontological approaches to works of 
music through an investigation of e -music as it emerged in the 1960s . The following 
charact eristics of e-music relate to Heidegger’s philosophy :  
(a) E-music illustrates how one hears already understood  sound s versus noise.  
(b) Works of e -music open sonic worlds  in which novel aural phenomena are set into 
work.  
(c) E-music is produced with innovative techno logies—such as the use of digital 
synthesizers or computers to manipulate sound parameters —which are explored 
by e-music  compositions . 
(d) Works of e -music establish relations of form, space and time among sounds through 
the explicit, controlled composition of  these dimensions.  
While Heidegger offers a transformative way of viewing art, his conception of 
historical change is open to critique. In addition to  illustrating the power of 
Heidegger’s innovative insights, we will also note their limitations —primarily from 
the viewpoint of Marx’s socio -historical philosophy, which Heidegger failed to 
appreciate (Habermas, 1992; Stahl, 1975) :  
(a) Heidegger’s  view of authentic man is ideological and individualistic, while his 
analysis of tools like e -music technologies downplays their ties to modes of 
production and consumption. (Adorno, 1964/1973)  
(b) Heidegger’s analysis of art ignores the complexity of the labor involved in making  
a film , a jug or a musical  composition, and how that work is socially and 
historically mediated . (Benjamin, 1936/1969)  
(c) Heidegger’s account of history ignores its social structuration , whereby history is 
not just given, but is produced, reproduced and transformed by works, including works of music . (Bourdieu, 1972/1995; Giddens, 1 984) 
(d) Heidegger’s characterization  of sculpture imposes his conceptualizations  of space 
and time,  rather than developing them from how they are disclosed in the work 
of sculpt ors and composers . (Mitchell, 2010)  
Heidegger sees the working of the work of art  as the revelation of truth. Marxists see 
the production of art as creative labor mediated by technological means  and social 
processes . Although neither Heidegger nor Marx explicitly considered music at 
length, analysis of t he technology and history of e -music can provide increased  
understanding of the insights and the limitations of both philosophies.  The following 
sections discuss e -music and other art forms from the perspectives of Heidegger’s 
four successive approaches to the being of artworks, raising concerns about the 
adequacy of those views . Examples from the development of e -music —and related  
observations from painting, pottery and sculpture —are used to extend Heidegger’s 
philosophy. These instances should render Heidegger’s abstruse ontological theories 
Marx and Heidegger  
  181 
more tangible and comprehensible, as well as suggest how aspects of the production 
process  and socio -historical context should be incorporated in the origin of the being 
of works of art. 
Beings  in the World  
Heidegger’s most important publication —which argued for the need to understand  
the being of beings in terms of how they are disclosed —was Being and Time 
(Heidegger, 1927/1996) . Here he rejected  the traditional view that people exist within 
an objective, value -free environment, surrounded by material objects upon which  they 
impose meanings. In contrast, he proposed that human existence discloses a n etwork 
of meaningful beings, whose significance is tentatively suggested from the start in 
terms of one’s concerns, expectations and pre -judgments. The world around us is 
always already understood;  Heidegger’s analysis is a philosophy  of just how the world  
is pre -interpreted —and how this understanding may subsequently be made explicit 
and further articulated  (Stahl, 1975; 1993) .  
Heidegger illustrates the pre -understanding  of the world in terms of how we hear 
sounds: 
Initially we never hear noises and complexes of sounds, but the creaking wagon, t he motorcycle. We hear the column on the march, the north wind, 
the woodpecker tapping, the crackling fire. It requires a very artificial and complicated attitude in order to “hear” a “pure noise.” (Heidegger, 
1927/1996, S. 163/p. 153; see also Heidegger, 1935/1963, S. 15/p. 656)
184 
In perceiving a sound, we immediately understand  it as something, as the sound of a 
certain object, instrument or process, or as a certain kind of sound.  
This can be directly applied to how we hear music. We do not first or primarily hear 
music as u ninterpreted raw sounds that we must then interpret. Rather we hear the 
bowing of a violin, the ringing of a bell, the strumming of a guitar. We hear the solemnity of a requiem, the joy of a jig or the romance of a love song. We may also 
hear the expressive communication of a performer or the emotional intention of a composer. According to Heidegger, these initial forms of being of the sounds are 
determined by our culture, by how “one” interprets them. Once something is initiall y 
disclosed in a certain way, we can develop our interpretation of it through explicitly 
building upon possibilities opened by how it was disclosed  and pre -understood .  
 
184 Citations of German publications list publication / translation  year, with German 
/ English pagination.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  182 
While Heidegger is focused on describing the experiential phenomena of pre -
understandin g, it is easy to see that there are social mechanisms at work there. For 
instance, pop music prejudices are systematically manufactured by a powerful culture 
industry, which produces, promotes, hypes and sells musical concerts and recordings 
(Adorno & Horkheimer, 1947/1972) . More subtly,  composers adopt mechanisms 
that contribute to pre -understanding . The system of Western classical tonality, which 
most music composers employ, is one example. Although music theory defines 12 
tones to the octave, virtually every classical  musical piece focuses on a subset of those 
12 tones. For instance, a piece in the C Major scale primarily uses the 7 notes of the octave that are white keys on a piano. Different scales produce different pre -
understandings  of mood for listeners.  
The alternative twelve -tone approach of serial composers like Schoenberg was an 
attempt to avoid the pre -understanding  fostered by tonal composition. Schoenberg 
arranged all 12 tones of the octave in a series, and his serial pieces ran through th eir 
series before repeating any tone  (Adorno, 1948/1973) . That eliminated the suggestion 
of an emphasized key and removed corresponding prejudices about the piece for the 
audience. The audience then had to overcome the consequent feeling of 
disorientation  and search for other interpretive features of the music. A lthough he 
sometimes rejected the tonality of traditional keys, Schoenberg retained the timbres 
of orchestral instruments and the emotionality of standard patterns of loudness 
(amplitude) and speed (tempo).  
The pioneers of e -music extended Schoenberg’s rej ection of classical tonality to other 
parameters of sound in their compositions. Webern —still within the Schoenberg 
school— integrated loudness into the serialization process, emphasizing silence at one 
end of that parameter’s scale. Silence was transformed  from just an implicit rest to 
slow down notes , into an explicit  (disclosed, hearable)  composed element. Silence 
functioned as “negative space” between consecutive sounds.  
The vision of  e-music was influenced by Edgar Varese and others who foresaw the 
possibility of composing with arbitrary timbres, not just the characteristic sounds of 
traditional physical instruments. The new science of acoustics and the developing 
technolog ies of electronic sound production suggested creating  sounds with any 
desired characteristics. In theory, t he sound of a note played on a piano, organ, guitar 
or violin —while quite complex —could be scientifically analyzed in terms of its pitch 
(frequency), timbre (overtones or waveform), and the attack, sustaining and decay of 
its loudness (amplitude  envelope ). Sound s could be produced and manipulated by 
electronic devices  (oscillators, controllers, filters, modulators, etc.), creating radically 
new sonic material through the total organization of the sound parameters  (Eimert, 
1957). Subsequently , it was possible to define a sound digitally by specifying with a 
computer its amplitude at each of thousands of microseconds. These individual ly 
constructed  sounds could then be combined  into a sound composition by splicing 
Marx and Heidegger  
  183 
tape recordings of fabricated and/or “found” (recorded) sound s, playing them 
sequentially on a synthesizer (Figure 1) or aggregating them with a sequencer.  
 
Figure 1. A 1975 Moog synthesizer. Photo from (Wikipedia_contributors, 2021) . 
E-music eliminated many of the familiar aural clues that provided a pre -understandi ng 
to an audience. Historical developments in musical composition met resistance from 
changes in the audience of music. The reproduction of music through radio and 
records had created a huge audience for music. However, much of that audience did 
not have t he cultural background to interpret and appreciate  classical music , such as 
Schoenberg’s serial music. To people who were not oriented to  exploring the new 
potentials of sound production, works of e -music could sound like  “just noise” —
incomprehensible sounds (Neill, 2002) . However, as discussed below, e -music opened 
up a world in which the nature of noise was itself disclosed as interpretable through 
a technological understanding of its being. 
(b) The W orking of the Work of Art   
In an essay central to  his middle period, Heid egger focused on the being of art. The 
Origin of the Work of Art (1935/1963; 1935/1964)  proposes that an art work can 
disclose a world in whi ch people may encounter the being of tools. For instance, van 
Gogh’s painting of a peasant woman’s shoes (Figure 2) discloses the being of her 
shoes as embedded in the peasant’s world:  

Marx and Heidegger  
  184 
Van Gogh’s painting is an opening -up of that which the tool, the pair of 
farmer’s boots, in truth is. This being steps out into the unconcealment of 
its being…. There is a happening of truth at work in the work, if an 
opening -up of the being happens here in that which is and how it is. 
(Heidegger, 1935/1963, S. 25, my translation)  
 
Figure 2. Van Gogh’s painting A Pair of Shoes . Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam. Photo 
by author.  
Heidegger proposes that the oil painting of the shoes discloses the nature of the shoes 
as serviceable and reliable tools in the peasant’s world. This represents a reversal of 
perspective from Being and Time, in which the being -there ( Da-Sein) of the viewer 
discloses the pai nting within its relations in the viewer’s and peasant’s network s of 
tools and concerns.  Here, being is disclosed by artworks as well as by human Dasein.  
In Being and Time, “Dasein” is generally assumed to correspond to an individual’s 
human existence. How ever, Dasein’s openness is not necessarily a matter of cognition 
by an individual mind. Consider, for instance, an audience at a concert : Their group 
listening opens the music’s world, as jointly understood by the collectivity. Then, the 
term “Dasein” refe rs to the shared being -there of the group at the musical event, an 
instance of being -there -with-others or group cognition (Stahl, 2006) . So, the Dasein 
of Being and Time can involve the disclosure of a world to an individual person, a group 
working together, an audience of some event, a culture and/ or even generic 
inauthentic common -sense understanding.  
In Heidegger’s consideration of art, the opening of being can t ake place through a 
work , such as a painting, jug, sculpture or poem . Such works  disclose meaningful 

Marx and Heidegger  
  185 
worlds. A tension  (struggle)  exists in these works between disclosing (world) and 
concealing  (earth). For instance, by opening access to the world of the shoes, van 
Gogh’s  painting conceals its own earthy materiality as paint on canvas . Heidegger 
refers to this tension as a Riss, which in German means tearing apart, but also the 
design, outline or boundary. This  boundary  is particularly  apparent in sculpture. A 
wood carving, for example, opens the space around and between the surfaces of the 
wooden forms that make up the sculptur e’s design, while the wood itself —with its 
internal structure, physical strength and materiality —lies hidden below the surface. 
As a bodily  object, a sculpture reveals one side at a time, concealing  visual access to 
temporarily hidden planes, which are implicitly indicated as around the bend .  
Heidegger argu es that van Gogh’s painting discloses the nature of the shoe s. 
However, this analysis only works because the painting is representational. Heidegger 
misses the painting’s deeper art -historical importance : the relationship to 
impressionist revelations about light and shadow, or van Gogh’s own exploration of 
brushstroke as an element of the materiality of paint. The significance of van Gogh’s 
paintings does not primarily  have to do with how they disclose th e lives of the people 
or the being of the tools represented in the worlds of the paintings. More important 
are his techniques of applying paint to the canvas,  leading  to the emergence of abstract 
art as exploration of the materials, geometry, light and texture of oil painting. By 
focusing on the painting’s representational function, Heidegger misses much of its 
historical import.  
The year after Heidegger’s essay on art  was written , the Marxist literary critic Walter 
Benjamin published The Work of Art in the  Age of Mechanical Reproduction  (1936/1969) . 
This essay can be read as a (possibly intentional) response to Heidegger , who does 
not acknowledge the historic changes in art . Benjamin reflects on the essential 
transformation from painting to mechanically reproducible forms of imaging, such as lithography, professional photography, silent film and sound movies. One can easily 
extend this technological development  forward with box cameras, Polaroid, 
Photoshop, iP hone selfies, Instagram, YouTube and TikTok. 
Benjamin delves into what takes place in historic transitions due to reproducibility, 
such as the transformation from live theater to film. In a play on stage, t he actors take 
on the roles of human characters and present them in a unique setting. By contrast, 
in the production of a movie, the actors are treated more like props, who adopt  
isolated poses, which are later edited together by a complex process involvin g many 
professionals and technical processes. The produced movie —having lost the “aura” 
of the unique occurrence —may then be seen by viewers anywhere and at any time. 
What once took the careful coordination of people (cast, audience, theater staff) 
coming together in space and time, can now be effortlessly reproduced anywhere . 
What formerly  opened an innovative world is now constrained as a commodity for 
mass consumption.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  186 
Theodor Adorno, music critic and friend of Benjamin, extends the analysis to music 
and the “culture industry ” (Adorno & Horkheimer, 1947/1972) . He argues that 
commercial pop music and big -band jazz represent trends in music resulting from its 
popularization through mechanical reproduction in recordings, similar to that of film  
(Dunn, 199 2). In earlier periods, people learn ed to play musical instruments and 
accordingly better understood what was involved in producing music , but records 
spread music to people with little understanding of music theory . Adorno discusses 
the dialectic of en lightenment, in which social progress toward increasing knowledge 
and morality has always been accompanied by regress. Benjamin’s examples of 
mechanical reproduction of art works illustrate this: the increasing democratization, 
popularization and accessibi lity of art due to technological progress in means of 
production has been accompanied throughout history by regression in the innovation 
of popular  works and the depth of understanding by the audience. While Adorno’s 
dialectic of culture parallels Heidegger’s abstract notion of the Riss as a conflict in art’s 
impact,  Adorno and his critical -social -theory colleagues such as Benjamin, 
Horkheimer, Marcuse and Habermas delve into the social and historical processes through which this tension occurs. The history  of e-music illustrate s the decline in the 
public’s  musical understanding in the following sections , as the ontological vision of 
e-music is gradually lost in the commercialism of pop music using electronic 
technologies . 
(c) Art in the A ge of Technology 
In a late essay, Heidegger returned to the project of Being and Time with a discussion 
of Time and Being (1962/1972) . Here, he maintains that the disclosure of being is given 
by successive “epochs of being ” throughout history. For instance, things were 
disclosed as creations of God during medieval times an d now they are given as 
material for, or products of, technological manipulation. This is Heidegger’s approach 
to integrating history into his ontology. The question is whether this is an adequate 
comprehension  of the role of history , particularly in the w orking of artworks . 
According to Heidegger, works of art set truth into work as the disclosure of being , 
where b eing is always disclosed in accordance with the prevailing epoch of being. 
Consider how this applies to music. Works of music open worlds —acoustic 
landscapes of meaningful sound. When the music is self -consciously technological, 
such as Stockhausen’s Konta kte (1962) , the sonic world is opened and understood as 
a technological product,  and the technical parameters may be made perceptible (heard 
as such). The nature of the sound is itself disclosed, rather than appearing as a 
presence of some other bein g (instrument, performer).  
Marx and Heidegger  
  187 
E-music provides a propitious example of technological being. E -music treats sound 
from a technological perspective  (Figure 3): as technically defined in objective, 
measurable terms of frequency and amplitude and as material for production and 
manipulation by technological means  (Manning, 2004; Pucke tte, 2007) . Even 
individual notes can be composed out of sound parameters —generating new kinds 
of sounds. Works  of e-music often evoke reflections on our technological age, such 
as images of space travel or video games . At the same time, they are freque ntly heard 
as noise —either the din of mechanical and technical contrivances or the 
incomprehensibility of strange sounds.  
 
Figure 3. Karlheinz Stockhausen in the Electronic Music Studio of WDR, Cologne, in 
1991. Photo by Kathinka Pasveer, retrieved from 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=8385683 . 
Within a Heideggerian viewpoint, noise is sound that is not pre -understood:  It makes 
no sense to the listener; it is not disclosed as meaningful (Stahl, 1976) . The pioneers 
of e- music had to explain to the listening public what they were trying to do  with 
sounds that seemed to be just noise . Verbal descriptions of the aims and methods of 
e-music  works  supported  understanding , helping  the music to be disclosed in a way 
that w ould not be rejected as incomprehensible noise but could be interpreted  within 
a context (world) of aural being (explorations of sound). Rigorous theoretical 
considerations by e-music composers abounded in the 1960s : Stockhausen's Texte, 
Xenakis ’ Formalized Music , Boulez ’ Boulez on Music Today , and articles in Die Reihe and 
Perspectives of New Music . In this way, the composers acted as ontologists, elucidating 
the hermeneutics of e -music. For Heidegger, ontology is simply the explication or 
radical interpretation of everyday understanding, which w as particularly urgent for e -

Marx and Heidegger  
  188 
music, given the extent to which it rejected many of the traditional crutches of music 
appreciation.  
The working of an e -music composition discloses something of the ontology of 
sound. In being crafted by a composer, performed by a musician, appreciated by a 
listener and analyzed by a critic, the work makes something of its sonic ontology 
visible to each of these audiences. They each articulate a different narrative of their 
interpretations, based on their concerns, expectations  and pre -judgments . However, 
a successful work must connect these communities within the shared world opened 
by the e -music work.  
Even noise—which is generally taken to be a rejection of understandability —can be 
interpreted  through a technological approach  to sound and its theory. E -music 
analyze d and work ed with noise. In technical terms, “white”  noise is a mixture of all 
frequencies of sound. It can , for instance,  be digitally generated with a random -
number generator specifying all frequencies  stochastically . White noise can then be 
manipulated with filters and amplitude envelops to produce musically interesting 
noise sound s within selected pitch ranges . Controlled noise can be integrated into 
music to add depth, as rock musicians  did with feedback from sp eakers and electronic  
distortion of their instruments , but now manipulated across the spectra of its technical 
parameters.  As discussed below, t he history of e- music provides a rich example of 
how the technological analysis  of musical sound was applied to compositional control 
over sound , including noise. It illustrates how a work of music opens a world in which 
the historical being of sound is disclosed… and transformed.  
The way in which a new understanding of noise arises through the composition of e -
music suggests that  Heidegger’s analyses inadequately appreciate the role of the artist’s 
productive labor that makes the work of art what it is.  The artist does not merely 
bring forth a work whose being is given by history, but rather structures the details o f 
the work’s being through the artist’s creative labor (working). This may point to a general problem with Heidegger’s ontology. While providing a brilliant 
phenomenological description of how beings are disclosed, he does not describe how 
an individual be ing (whether thing, tool, work or Dasein) comes to be disclosed not 
only as the kind of being it is, but also as the unique being that it is. Even if one 
focuses on the artwork’s being, it is necessary to analyze how that being becomes 
specified.  
What is the relation of an artwork’s working to the artist’s historically situated work? 
Perhaps what Heidegger discusses as the Riss between earth and world in the being 
of van Gogh’s painting was set into the artwork by van Gogh’s artistic working with 
earth and  world in creating the painting, as they interacted within the play of van 
Gogh’s historical world. How is his painting’s earth related to the artist’s brushstroke style and how is the painting’s world related to the life of contemporary farmers? How 
is the working of noise in e -music structured by the composer’s work in creating the 
music?  
Marx and Heidegger  
  189 
In his essay on The Thing, Heidegger (1950/1967)  considers the example of a jug  to 
discuss in general how things are disclosed . He suggests that the being  of the jug is 
centered on its interior void, which can be filled with water or wine and can offer it 
for pouring and imbibing. Heidegger seems to have in mind a hand -crafted ancient 
Greek jug, which functioned with the “aura” of a unique thing in the here and now —
not an interchangeable  jug from a factory assembly line  in the technological era . 
However, he does not describe how an individual  jug concretely comes to be what it 
is—with its uniqu e character and aura as well as with its particular functional shape —
through the potter’s effort, rather than a factory’s production .  
Learning to make traditional pottery involves acquiring skills and knowledge to be able to produce jugs that can fulfill a well -functioning jug’s tasks. Creating an 
aesthetically pleasing jug involves a series of many phases: acquiring and preparing the 
clay; gathering the tools and equipment; centering the lump of clay on the rotating 
potter’s wheel; opening a void in the l ump; pulling the sides up in several pulls without 
the sides collapsing; shaping the interior curve to match the exterior curve; partially 
drying the piece to give it strength; trimming the thrown piece and cutting a foot on 
it; gently shaping a spout that  will pour without dripping; attaching a pulled length of 
clay for a handle that will fit a human grip and provide balanced lifting; slowly drying the clay without cracking; optionally etching design in the surface; firing the jug; 
glazing it and firing it  again.  
Each stage of producing the jug by hand is an exploratory experiment and the final 
product is always somewhat of a surprise. There is an interplay between one’s aims 
and the results. At each successive stage, one is confronted by an object with it s own 
character. The back and forth between the artist’s strivings and the evolving work’s 
response is typical of all forms of artistic production. An artist does not simply impose 
a pre -conceived template  on some physical material (clay, wood, pigment, so und, 
etc.). There is an interplay between creator and created, between mind and eye 
(Merleau -Ponty, 1961/1964) , between disclosing and conc ealing, between 
enlightenment and regress. This interplay  during creation is then established in the 
work of art as its specific working or unique being.  
In The Origin of the Work of Art, Heidegger writes about the connection of the work to 
its creator:  
Although the work  of art  becomes actual only in the carrying out of the 
creating, and thus depends upon this act for its reality, the nature of creating 
is thereby dependent upon the nature of the work…. From the perspective 
of the achieved outlining of th e nature of the artwork —according to which,  
in the work the happening of truth is at work —we can characterize creating 
as a letting something emerge as something brought forth. The work’s 
becoming a work is a way in which truth becomes and happens. (Heidegger, 
1935/1963, S. 48f/p. 683f, my translation)  
Marx and Heidegger  
  190 
Here, Heidegger acknowledges the craft of the artist but subordinates it to the 
working  of the work  itself that opens a world and reveals something. Heidegger’s shift 
from the artist to the work as primary creative agent is central to his philosophic 
contributio n, overcoming the subjectivism of previous philosophy and aesthetic 
theory. However, his presentations lack adequate concreteness and tend to leave underlying processes vague and mysterious. He does not recognize the ontological 
role of the artist in shapi ng how the individual work that is brought forth becomes 
what it is as a particular work with a unique way of working. While it is true that the potter’s work is guided by the nature of jugs, each jug is different in detail due to the 
specifics of the pott er’s work.  
The creation of art is always a historical ly mediated  process, reaching back to the stone 
age for pottery, painting, music, sculpture and poetry —while innovating into the 
future. The artist pushes previous inquiries further, confronting issues t hat arose in 
past works and adopting techniques that have been developed by earlier artists. For 
instance, the potter, in creating a jug that will open a world that discloses people 
enjoying the fruits of the earth and skies, explores how best to accomplis h that, given 
the historically prevailing conditions and technologies. The potter selects the right clay and glazes. She experiments with how different construction techniques, various 
spouts and specific handle curves contribute to how the unique created jug works to 
open a specific world, in which the jug can work  effectively as desired. The potter’s 
craft, worked out on a specific, concrete piece of work, refines the being of that work, 
deciding how it will work, that is, how it will be. 
Only through  the historically situated labor of the artist is the work of art established 
the way that it is (its being) in the world that it opens —not just through historical 
change writ large, but through the concrete application of specific production 
technologies unde r particular socio -economic conditions. This process is suggested  
by Heidegger, but not investigated in sufficient social and historical detail. Benjamin’s 
studies of mechanical reproduction and Adorno’s writings on the culture industry 
provide important e xtensions and correctives to Heidegger , showing that in addition 
to the artistic and craft -related explorations of the artist, the current forces of 
production (e.g., mechanical reproduction) and the prevailing social/economic 
relations (e.g., commodificat ion by the culture industry) affect the way a work opens 
(and conceals) its world .  
The development of e -music illustrates the complexity of historic processes of 
progress and regress. We have already seen how the composers of e -music explored 
innovative w ays to open acoustic worlds. However, there is also a retrograde 
movement: Technology enable s new sounds but remove s compositions of these 
sounds  further from the comprehension of an audience.  The origins of music in the 
human bod y (heartbeat, breathing) , dance and the physicality of playing physical 
instruments are replaced in e-music by technical tasks that manipulate abstract 
parameters on machines . For instance, Stockhausen often computes the timing and 
Marx and Heidegger  
  191 
other parameters of sounds mathematically rather than through bodily movements 
(Neill, 2002) . Live, responsive  performance is supplanted  by methodical efforts  in 
electronic laboratories far removed from potential audiences  (Figure 3) .  
The issues of performance and audience raised by e -music had to be addressed. They 
led to  the incorporation of sounds and techniques pioneered by e -music being 
integrated into and co -opted by more popular musical forms. This brought in live 
performance, reintroducing and even accentuating movement of the human body as 
a basis of repetitive rhy thm (Glover, 201 3). The electronic synthesizer, the sequencer 
of recorded sounds and even the computer -generated tape became additional musical 
instruments, eventually often subordinated to traditional instruments (piano, guitar) 
and practices (tonality, common tempo) (Neill, 2002) . Innovative e- music sounds or 
rhythms were often used to introduce pieces of pop music that soon devolved into 
traditional song styles (Dunn, 1992) . New genres also appeared, incorporating and 
concealing e -music techniques: electro -acoustics combining synthesizers, tape and 
instruments; rap mixing dr um machines and recorded sounds; trance -music exploiting 
ethereal resonances and mechanized repetition. These hybrids were easier to market as cultural commodities and they frequently lost their aura of innovative openings to 
worlds of sound as disclosed i n e-music. Electronic music had a profound impact on 
the history of music. It fueled a diverse array of new genres, enabling innovative ways 
for music to be and work. Simultaneously, the technologies of electronic music were 
coopted by the pop -music cultur e industry, slightly modifying commercial music, but 
ignoring the e- music vision of opening worlds that disclosed the nature of sound. This 
history of e -music is much richer than suggested in Heidegger’s simplified history of 
being. 
(d) Relations of A rtistic Form  
One of Heidegger’s last publications, Art and Space (1969/1973) , is associated with his 
contact with sculptors (Mitchell, 2010) . Here, Heidegger rejects the traditional view 
of sculpture as formed matter within an objective, pre -existing extended space. 
Although he does not discuss any specific example of sculpture, he  considers how 
sculptures define “places ” in relation to each other. Heidegger resorts to his critique 
in Being and Time of Newtonian space in favor of human places, now expressed in his 
later terminology. He writes that  sculpture does not passively occupy  homogeneous 
three -dimensional space, but opens -up regions in which people can meaningfully live: 
Sculpture [is] the embodiment of places. Places, in preserving and opening 
a region, hold something free gathered around them which grants the 
tarrying of things under consideration and a dwelling for man in the midst 
of things. (Heidegger, 1969/1973, S. 11/p. 7)  
Marx and Heidegger  
  192 
Sculpture , as a form of artwork,  can reveal  spatial being . Henry Moore’s Three -Piece 
Sculpture  (Figure 4) illustr ates a region of places opened -up and embodied by a 
sculpture. The massive bronze forms of bonelike knobs and points of Moore’s 
sculpture define multiple places in relationship to each other. They reflect each other 
as related, but each unique. The interconnected forms press upon one another and support each other, creating a complex of places that defines a structured region . 
 
Figure 4. Henry Moore, Three -Piece Sculpture: Vertebrae , 1968 -69, bronze, approx. 3 ' x 
8' x 4'. Hirschhorn Sculpture Garden, Washington, DC. Photo by author.  
By integrating three cast pieces into a single sculpture, Moore’s  work opens negative  
spaces between the pieces, in addition to and uniting the open areas  surrounding the 
embodied forms of the individual pieces. Her e, the accessible  space is not an 
unstructured abstract volume, but a well -defined system of openings that invite the 
beholder’s eyes and body to circulate through and around the work to explore its 
variety and interrelationships. The work of sculpture wor ks to disclose a structured 
space that would not exist without it, in which people can tarry and experience a world 
of meaningful inter- related  places  within a larger region . 
The work ing involves a dynamic between revealing and concealing. As a work, a 
sculpture opens a devoted area around itself, structured by the sculpture’s  massed  
form s, which extends out from  that work . The surfaces of the form s are revealed, but 
they simultaneously conceal what lies below, behind or beyond the surface: the 
interior of the wood, stone, bronze or other material , as well as the voids, hidden 
surfaces and surroundings .  
Certain sculptures may attempt to open -up the concealed interior —for instance by 
poking a hole into or through the surface ’s forms or by chipping away the s mooth 
outer surface to expose internal material . Or they may  reveal the effort of carving the 

Marx and Heidegger  
  193 
material by leaving traces of that human effort and procedure. Through such elements 
of the work’s design, the interior is opened -up, but then simultaneously clos ed along 
the new surfaces  (outline or Riss). 
Negative form can be viewed as an effort to reverse what is concealed and what is revealed. In some sculptures, the space is revealed by simply outlining it or otherwise 
indicating it. In others, the normally co ncealed interior space is opened -up by 
providing just a structure to define it as a space. For instance, one could consider Giacometti’s thin plaster sculptures  of women  to be presenting just the interior core 
of a human figure, absent the usual concealing  layer of the body’s flesh  and skin.  
Sculptors like Moore and Giacometti explore materials, sizes, shapes, representations 
and topologies that allow their sculptures to work to open worlds, places and regions 
for human tarrying. Through their sculpting, t hey pursue ontological investigations of 
how to let works be, such that they open certain sorts of worlds. For instance, Moore’s sculpture of vertebrae incorporates his lifetime of sculptural studies of boney forms, 
reclining human figures and multi- piece interactions. Giacometti spent decades of his 
career building up and chipping away thousands of plaster representations of female models, struggling to get the sculptures to disclose the being of the human body in a 
specific way. Their skilled working with  their materials, experiences, technologies and 
techniques defined their tireless working to create works of art. The works did not 
suddenly appear but emerged under their meticulous and relentless efforts to produce 
works with specific kinds of being. In fact, for leading modern sculptors like Rodin, 
Brancusi, Giacometti, Degas, Barlach and Moore, the finished sculptures are less important than the work of sculpting, the endlessly repeated working of their forms, 
materials and techniques to bring forth pie ces that set into work some truth that they 
are implicitly struggling toward and gradually approaching.  
Analogously to sculpture, e- music can be heard as sequences of sculpted moments of 
sound, often delimited and individuated by silences. In a lecture on “The Four Criteria 
of Electronic Music ,” Stockhausen specified that e -music was characterized by its focus 
on composing relations among times, tones,  spaces and noise. His defining features 
of e-music were:  
1. Unified time structuring.  
2. Splitting of the sound. 
3. Multilayered spatial composition.  
4. Continuum of tone and noise. (Stockhausen, 1972)  
His composition Kontakte was structured by de -composing sound into its parameters 
of temporal duration, timbral components, spatial location and noise band, as well as 
pitch  and loudness— each defined along scales. Here, Stockhausen extended the 
intervallic serialization he learne d from Schoenberg and Webern to all the parameters 
of sound, creating tones that had not been composed before, in more complex 
Marx and Heidegger  
  194 
relationships, opening new possibilities of acoustic places and moments layered upon 
each other to create temporal structures.  
Music, more explicitly than other art forms, creates sequential temporal forms. The being of a musical work according to Heidegger’s analysis of art is its working, which 
is a process that necessarily unfolds in time. The character, being or origin of a work  
of music is not an attribute of its immediate presence but is disclosed through its manner of opening a sonic world temporally. Specifically, e -music harnessed 
electronic and digital technologies to control the timing of individual sounds, of phrases and of overall compositions. E -music explored innovative timings of sound 
wave forms, envelopes, sequences and movements. It not only replaced traditional 
timings but developed a wholly new systematic approach to temporality as a central 
dimension of control a nd composition. Some of Stockhausen’s compositions allow 
for the sequencing of movements or even of sounds to be determined by chance, rather than by the score, making explicit the role of temporal sequence in the being 
of the sonic work.  
Stockhausen metho dically explored the being of sound and how works of music open 
acoustic worlds. He shifted the science of acoustics into a philosophy and ontology 
of sound by investigating the effects of the various parameters of sound on the 
working of e -music compositi ons to achieve musical works with innovative being. 
Many of Stockhausen’s major pieces of e -music were designed, defined, composed 
and refined by him to disclose selected aspects of the being of sound through the 
working of the musical work. For example, h is composition, “ Beethoven Opus 1970,” 
electronically transformed moments from Beethoven’s oeuvre to re -disclose the 
acoustic being of Beethoven’s sounds in the technological era. His monumental 
“Hymnen ” manipulated sound samples from national anthems to d isclose how they 
opened nationalist worlds, just as Hendrix’s distorted electric guitar version of “ Star 
Spangled Banner ” opened a politically construed world for his audience at Woodstock 
during the Vietnam War. 
As part of its working, a  work of art  functions as  a communication between its creator 
and its recipients.  It discloses  to the listener/ viewer/preserver what is rendered  
perceptible  in the work —an opening of worlds that can be shared . Heidegger notes  
about the audience role: 
Preserving the work doe s not individualize people  to their life -experiences , 
but draws them into their belonging to the truth that happens in the work, 
and thereby grounds their being -for and being -with-one-another as the 
historical standing -out of being -there (Da -Sein) in relation to 
unconcealedness . (Heidegger, 1935/1963, S. 55f/p. 690, my translation)   
Thus, the work functions to build historically situated inter -subjectivity , grounded in 
the work.  It opens ontol ogical understanding: a shared understanding of the being of 
the sounds, work and world.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  195 
 An artwork brings a work  into the world, opening a space for it to do its work in its 
historical social setting. Of course, a work of music, painting, pottery or sculpture 
does not appear sui generis, on its own, as Heidegger’s presentation might lead one to 
believe. Just as the clay jug, van Gogh’s painting or Moore’s sculpture  required a 
complex crafting, based on culturally  developed and passed- down practices, 
Stockhausen’s compositions called upon  the skill and intellectual effort of a world -
class artist  and drew  upon the state -of-the-art technical world  to compose works with 
the proper being .  
While Heidegger’s focus on the being of the work is central to his contribution, it is 
also necessary to consider the role of the artist and the audience in not just passively 
dwelling in the world opened by the work, but also in actively determining the 
concrete and specific way a work, as a unique being, works. Talented  artists are 
ontologists, sculpting the being of their works, as evidenced by the historically 
innovative forms of disclosure of the worlds they open.  
e-Music in Socio -historical Context 
Heidegger’s writings on works of art can provide ground -breaking  ways of viewing 
art, including music. They provide an alternative , ontological  perspective from that 
offered by previous , subjectivistic or positivistic  Western thinking about art, space, 
time and being. However, when compared with discussions by writers like  Adorno 
and Benjamin, approaching from an analysis  of historical development based on 
Marx, one finds Heidegger’s descriptions  lacking sufficient  depth of social and 
historical considerations . Heidegger’s writings take on a feeling of somewhat 
superficial jargon or mysticism (Adorno, 1964/1973) . How does disclosure of a 
unique creative work take place  concretely ? How are the historical epochs of being 
given, such that one flows into the next ? 
The social theorist Giddens proposed a notion of “structuration,” whereby  social 
institutions and forces do not so much  influence the behavior of individuals in a given 
society, as they are themselves produced and reproduced by the habitual practices of 
those people and their communities  (Giddens, 1984) . In this view, social structures 
exist only in and through these enduring and evolving reproductive patterns of 
repetitive behavior: Their being is temporal.  The history of e -music —as a developing 
body of compositional techniques —can provide a model of the concrete social and 
historical kinds of processes of structuration by which the history of art and the 
development of the technological character of our age int ertwine  dialectically . In 
particular, we can see the historical dimension of e -music involving the situated being 
and activity of the works, composers and audiences as they interact in socio -
historically concrete circumstances to structure the being of the  e-music pieces.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  196 
The fact that e- music compositions reflected the availability of evolving technological 
means was not the result of some mysterious arrival and imposition of a new “epoch 
of being .” Rather,  the production and working of this music itself anticipated, 
proclaimed and contributed to the historical age. In the development of e -music, 
composers did not just take advantage of newly existing technologies to create 
innovative  sounds. They also anticipated potential novel tech niques and often 
invented the requisite tools. The working of the works of e -music propelled this 
historical change as well as disclosing it  to the ears of the audience.   
The history of being consists of the repetitive behaviors of people, such as the cultural 
practices e mbodied in the working of art works; it is not an outside force or source 
of determination, but an “eventing” (Ereignis ) of the working of the historic works . 
E-music helped to define the technological era by incorporating technological 
elements into the s uccession of sonic works, which both reproduced established 
approaches to musical composition and on their basis produced novel extensions to it, which could in turn then be taken up in future works in unanticipated ways. E -
music composers and their works literally made history —the history of technological 
being. As Marx famously put it, “People make their own history, but they make it 
under inherited, found and pregiven conditions not chosen by them” (Marx, 
1852/1963, p. 15).  
Social practices are collected, preserved and expanded within the contemporary 
culture, as a massive collection of mostly tacit patterns of b ehaviors, which provide 
the conditions for the creation of new works of art. Socio -cultural practices are 
analogous to people’s behavioral habits; Bourdieu (1972/1995)  showed how much of 
one’s “habitus” is grounded in o ne’s body and personal artifacts (e.g., clothing, food, 
home and kinship structure). Technological practices of music production are 
embodied in the body of work of e -music compositions, as written, performed, 
recorded and heard.  
The habitus, culture, inst itutional base of structuration or knowledge of compositional 
technique is a “system of durable, transposable dispositions” (Bourdieu, 1972/1995, 
p. 72) . Skill or expertise does not consist of a store of pr opositional statements, mental 
representations or explicit rules, but as the ability to engage over time in various 
extended practices. It is a matter of dispositions or the likely ability to respond 
extemporaneously to similar situations —to “go on” as Wittgenstein (1953)  said—
rather than fixed propositional knowledge or trained behaviors. It grows and becomes better defined through reiterat ion. The work of a composer or the working of a 
composition takes place by improvisational reproduction of the repetitive practices 
that occur in this system of habits. The replication typically takes place tacitly, without 
following an explicit rule of be havior or aiming at a preceding intention —adapting 
previous models intuitively and creatively, neither mechanically nor consciously. It may be accompanied —especially retrospectively in reflection —by a folk -theory 
narrative or account. However, the way to c omprehend it theoretically is to 
Marx and Heidegger  
  197 
understand it historically in terms of the forces and processes that mediated the 
original occurrence of the practice, rather than only the circumstances surrounding its 
current repetition.  
E-music evolved out of previous compositional practice, such as established 
approaches to serialization and orchestration. The addition of new sonic forms and techniques involved reflective and articulated considerations by composers 
concerning their aesth etic circumstances and possibilities. These additions 
contributed to the history and growing scope of e -music —often being incorporated 
in updated technologies, such as synthesizers, which  helped to institutionalize the 
practices made easier and standardize d by such tools. Technological artifacts (tools, 
works, texts) could then serve as “ immutable  mobiles” (Latour, 1990)  to spread the 
innovations  or “boundary objects” (Star, 1989)  to bridge different compositional 
approaches. There was an e -music community of composers, performers, critics and 
audiences, within which processes of apprenticeship and “legitimate peripheral 
participation” (Lave & Wenger, 1991)  transformed the community as well as the 
nature of new works. As time went on and the onc e shockingly innovative practices 
of structuring sound became habituated to by audiences as well as composers, they 
tended to lose their impact and become integrated into the commercial music 
industry. Thus, history happened. That history can best be under stood by interpreting 
the e -music worlds in which the new practices originally occurred.  
Viewed from a critical socio -historical or Marxist perspective, Heidegger’s analyses 
are not sufficiently grounded in social reality , habitus and structuration proces ses. As 
already noted, Heidegger over- looked the post- impressionist historical context of van 
Gogh ’s painting.  When van Gogh painted the peasant’s shoes in 1886, photography 
had already become well established as an art form and was about to become readily  
available to the public with the Kodak box camera, so there was little need for painting to imitate visual reality. Rather, van Gogh’s contemporaries were exploring effects of 
lighting and techniques of applying pigment. Van Gogh’s contribution was to tak e up 
the lessons and experiments of his predecessors and colleagues and to create works that opened new possibilities in the technology of painting. The evocative quality of 
his painting of shoes —that captured Heidegger’s attention —was due precisely to its  
shift away from photographic realism to a focus on the painter’s uses of light and pigment, which dramatically highlight the emotional, social and situated character of 
the subject —missing from standard photographic images.  
Heidegger  similarly  ignore s the meticulous efforts that go into making a pottery piece, 
including techniques and technologies developed socially over generations. Likewise, 
sculpture open s space through the complex processes that go into forming the 
sculpture , through which the sculptor fine tunes the being of the work and of the 
world it opens . Perhaps the artist’s ontological contribution is even clearer in e -music. 
This artistic movement explored how to create works of music that effectively opened 
worlds of sound. It thereby showed in technical detail how the being of individual 
Marx and Heidegger  
  198 
sounds could be constructed and then composed into specific works of music that 
would disclose particular new worlds.  
It is also important to recognize that  the historical process of e- music ultimatel y 
unfolded  concretely and dialectically  within the relations of commercial music . For 
music in general, the mechanical re production  (tapes and records) and later the digital 
production of sound (mp3s and iPods) not only provided for a tremendously 
expanded  global audience for Western music, but also transformed the nature of 
musical reception, as anticipated  and documented by Benjamin and Adorno. By 
increasing control over the timing of sound events and even automating their 
repetition, e -music  led not only  to synthesizers of universal sound production, but 
also to sequencers of rhythms, such as popular drum machines.  
The long- term result of the e -music genre was not just to open the world of sound as 
understood in technical terms of frequency, amplitude, n oise, algorithmic patterns, 
and relations among temporal moments or acoustic places . Also, it was to devolve 
into commercialized forms of disco, rap and new -age trance music, which  could be 
profitably manufactured with drum machines  (Dunn, 1992) . Much of what e- music 
had revealed  was thereby re-concealed by pop music , as practices of music production 
became more distant from the original e -music innovations and more enmeshed with 
business practices . The relations of production in capitalist economies 
(commodification and monetary profit) channel the evolution of the technological 
means of production  (Marx, 1867/1977) . This must be recognized  in order to extend 
the understanding of music , art and being  from the perspective of Heidegger’s 
ontology .  
 
In addition to painting, pottery and sculpture, Heidegger considered poetry. For him, 
this was the most important form of artwork, because it involves the wor king of 
language. Language is the house of being, in which social practices are articulated and 
preserved, as they define the flow of the history of being. Unfortunately, it is beyond 
the scope of this essay to consider the working of poetry and the role o f language, as 
would be necessary for a more complete reflection on Heidegger and art.  
Heidegger’s philosophy of being, as it evolved through his life’s work, provides useful 
ways of considering the nature of music and other art forms. Conversely, 
conside rations of socio- historical aspects of artistic production provide important 
correctives to Heidegger’s incomplete  analyses. E -music offers an example of musical 
development— contemporaneous with Heidegger’s writings —that opens a view that 
can both confirm and extend his insights. 
Marx and Heidegger  
  199 
References  
Adorno, T. W. (1948/1973). Philosophy of modern music  (A. G. Mitchell & W. V. 
Bloomster, Trans.). New York, NY: The Seabury Press.  
Adorno, T. W. (1964/1973). The jargon of authenticity (K. Tarnowski & F. Will, 
Trans.). Evanston, IL: Northwestern U. Press.  
Adorno, T. W., & Horkheimer, M. (1947/1972). The dialectic of enlightenment  (J. 
Cumming, Trans.). New York, NY: Continuum.  
Benjamin, W. (1936/1969). The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction 
(H. Zohn, Trans.). In H. Arendt (Ed.), Illuminations.  (pp. 217 -251). New 
York, NY: Schocken Books. 
Bourdie u, P. (1972/1995). Structures and the habitus (R. Nice, Trans.). In Outline of 
a theory of practice.  (pp. 72 -95). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Dunn, D. (1992). A history of electronic music pioneers. In Eigenwelt der apparatewelt: 
Pioneers of  electronic art.  Linz, Austria: Ars Electronica exhibition.  
Eimert, H. (1957). What is electronic music?  Die Reihe., 1 , 1-10. 
Giddens, A. (1984). Elements of the theory of structuration. In The constitution of 
society. (pp. 1 -40): U of California Press.  
Glover, R. (2013). Minimalism, technology and electronic music. In Ashgate research 
companion to minimalist and postminimalist music.  (pp. 161 -180). Farnham, UK: 
Ashgate. 
Habermas, J. (1992). Work and weltanschauung: The Heidegger controversy from a 
German p erspective. In H. Dreyfus & H. Hall (Eds.), Heidegger: A critical 
reader.  Oxford, UK: Blackwell.  
Heidegger, M. (1927/1996). Being and time: A translation of Sein und Zeit  (J. Stambaugh, 
Trans.). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.  
Heidegger, M. (1935/1963). Der Urspru ng des Kunstwerkes. In M. Heidegger (Ed.), 
Holzwege.  Frankfurt a. M., Germany: Klostermann.  
Heidegger, M. (1935/1964). The origin of the work of art (A. Hofstadter, Trans.). In 
A. Hofstadter & R. Kuhns (Eds.), Philosophies of art and beauty.  (pp. 647 -701).  
New York, NY: Modern Library. 
Heidegger, M. (1950/1967). Das Ding. In Vorträge und Aufsätze II.  (pp. 37 -60). 
Pfullingen, Germany: Neske.  
Heidegger, M. (1962/1972). On time and Being  (J. Stambaugh, Trans.). New York, 
NY: Harper & Row.  
Heidegger, M. (1969/1 973). Art and space (C. Seibert, Trans.). Man and world. 6 (1), 
3-8. 
Latour, B. (1990). Drawing things together. In M. Lynch & S. Woolgar (Eds.), 
Representation in scientific practice.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learni ng: Legitimate peripheral participation . 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Marx and Heidegger  
  200 
Manning, P. (2004). Electronic and computer music . Oxford, UK: Oxford University 
Press.  
Marx, K. (1852/1963). The eighteenth brumaire of Louis Bonaparte . New York, NY: 
International Publishers.  
Marx, K. (1867/1977). Capital  (B. Fowkes, Trans. Vol. I). New York, NY: Vintage.  
Merleau -Ponty, M. (1961/1964). Eye and mind (C. Dallery, Trans.). In J. M. Edie 
(Ed.), The primacy of perception. (pp. 159 -190). Evanston, IL: Northwestern 
University Press. 
Mitchell, A. (2010). Heidegger among the sculptors: Body, space and the art of dwelling . 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.  
Neill, B. (2002). Pleasure beats: Rhythm and the aesthetics of cu rrent electronic 
music. Leonardo Music Journal. 12 , 3-6. 
Puckette, M. (2007). Theory and techniques of electronic music . Singapore: World Scientific 
Publishing Company.  
Stahl, G. (1975). Marxian hermeneutics and Heideggerian social theory: Interpreting and  
transforming our world.  Unpublished Dissertation, Ph.D., Department of 
Philosophy, Northwestern University. Evanston, IL. Web: 
http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/marx . 
Stahl, G. (1976). Attuned to Being: Heideggerian music in technological society. 
Boundary 2. IV (2), 637 -664. Web: 
http://GerryStahl.net/publications/interpretations/attuned.pdf . 
Stahl, G. (1993). Interpretation in design: The problem of tacit and explicit understanding in 
computer support of cooperative design.  Unpublished Dissertation, Ph.D., 
Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado. Bou lder, CO. 
Web: http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/tacit . 
Stahl, G. (2006). Group cognition: Computer support for building collaborative knowledge . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. W eb: http://GerryStahl.net/elibrary/gc . 
Star, S. L. (1989). The structure of ill -structured solutions: Boundary objects and 
heterogeneous distributed problem solving. In L. Gasser & M. N. Huhns 
(Eds.), Distributed artificial intelligence.  (pp. 37 -54). San Mateo, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann.  
Stockhausen, K. (1962). The concept of unity in electronic music. Perspectives of New 
Music. 1 (1), 39 -48. 
Stockhausen, K. (1972). Four criteria o f electronic music . YouTube: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xyGtI7KKIY . 
Wikipedia_contributors. (2021). Electronic music . Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Web: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?tit le=Electronic_music&oldid
=998812023 . 
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical investigations . New York, NY: Macmillan.  
 
Marx and Heidegger  
  201 
Bio                     .      
Gerry Stahl  followed the development of e -music while researching a philosophy 
dissertation on Heidegger and Marx in Germany and the USA in the 1960s and 
1970s— and even experimented a bit in electronic and computer music, without 
success. His eventual career was in information science and research on computer support for group cognition  (see http://GerryStahl.net ). He retired as emeritus 
professor from Drexel University and now carves wood sculpture in Cape Cod.  
 
 
  
Marx and Heidegger  
  202 
 

