Elephants' giant, hot testicles
could stop them getting cancer


By Ethan Freedman

Scientist claims elephants' cancer
preventing genes may have evolved to
protect their sperm from the scorching
hot habitats they live in.

PIX
A young African elephant sitting in a river in Kenya.
(Image credit: Vicki Jauron, Babylon and Beyond Photography/Getty
Images)

Elephants rarely get cancer, and their giant, hot
testicles might provide a clue as to why.

The idea comes down to a protein called p53,
which helps prevent DNA damage in cells —
including damage that could turn a normal cell
into a cancerous cell. 

Elephants, unlike humans, have multiple copies of
the gene that encodes p53 — meaning, the gene
that provides the “recipe” for the body to make
the protein. Fritz Vollrath, an evolutionary
biologist at the University of Oxford, said this
could help to protect their sperm from hot
temperatures.

This hypothesis starts with "Peto's paradox,"
Vollrath told Live Science.

In the 1970s, an epidemiologist named Richard
Peto described a puzzling phenomenon: Large
animals, despite having many more cells that
could potentially turn into cancerous cells, don't
seem to have a higher risk of developing cancer
than smaller animals. This is particularly
astounding in elephants — they are statistically
less likely to develop cancer than humans, despite
being many times our size.

A few years ago, researchers found that elephants
have 20 copies of the gene that encodes the p53
protein. Humans, in comparison, have just one.
The protein essentially works like a copy editor,
reviewing genetic material as cells multiply and
potentially killing oe cells with any damages that
could lead to cancer. As elephants have multiple
copies of the gene that encodes p53, they could
have multiple rounds of "copy-editing," which
could vastly reduce the risk of a damaged cell
surviving.

PIX
Chart showing dieerent animal sizes and cancer mortality rates.
(Image credit: Visual Capitalist/Science Photo Library/Getty Images)

But why did elephants evolve 20 copies of this
gene? Vollrath thinks it has to do with their
testicles. Many male animals, including humans,
have their testicles partially outside their body to
cool them down, which is believed to be
important for creating a healthy batch of sperm.
The reasons for this are unclear, though it may
have something to do with increased DNA
damage at higher temperatures.

Through a quirk of evolutionary history, however,
elephant testicles are located inside their bodies.
As multi-ton, dark gray animals walking around in
the sun, their testicles have the potential to get
really hot — and therefore the elephants may
have trouble making viable sperm. But if they had
more copy-editing proteins, the theory goes, that
hot sperm could be protected from damage.. 

Vollrath published this hypothesis as a note in the
journal Trends in Ecology and Evolution on June
27.

It is hard to assess why exactly a particular trait
might have evolved in a species, Vincent Lynch, an
evolutionary biologist at the University of Buealo,
who was not involved in developing this new
hypothesis, told Live Science.

It's possible that multiple copies of the p53 gene
evolved to protect elephant sperm from hot
temperatures. But it's also possible that those
multiple copies evolved because elephants are big
animals so are potentially more susceptible to
cancer, Lynch said. It could also be both things at
once.

Other large animals don't have multiple copies of
the p53 gene. Whales, for example, are large
animals with internal testicles, but they seem to
have just one copy. But whales also have an
internal system to cool their testicles down,
Vollrath noted – plus, it doesn’t get as hot in the
water.

Similarly, animals closely related to elephants,
such as hyraxes, also have internal testicles. But
these animals are much smaller than elephants,
and small animals are way more elcient at
dissipating heat than large animals, Lynch said.

No matter how it evolved, elephants seem to have
a way of naturally circumventing cancer — and
studying how it works may help us understand
more about the disease, Vollrath said.
